ACT I.

Scene T.—A handsomely furnished Saloon in a Hotel at Nottingham—Julia’s Apartment—Window with Balcony, l. h.—Centre Doors—Door R. h.—Julia, in an elegant deshabille, is discovered at a table, writing—Music.

Julia. [Repeating as she writes.] My dear Sharp—I am now playing in Nottingham—my success has been unprecedented—I am a prisoner here for another week, so I cannot appear at Drury-Lane Theatre until next month. [Knocks.] Come in! [Enter a Waiter, with a salver, on which are three Cards. Julia takes one of them. Heads.]—Captain Maltravers—Mr. Selwyn Dawdle—Lord Arthur Shafton. Yes, I will see them. Show the gentlemen in. [Exit Waiter.] Oh dear! these officers are horrid bores, but they take a private box every night.

Enter Lord Arthur, Maltravers, and Selwyn.

Mal. [Off-hand.] Ah, my enchantress! we cannot resist your spell. You were divine last night!

Sei. Quite so!—divine!—just what I was going to say.

Mal. That third act was tremendous!

Sei. Quite so!

Julia. Oh really, you flatter.

Sei. Just what I was going to say!

Julia. Lord Arthur, you are silent; and yet last night I exerted myself to please you—but there you sat as usual, unmoved, pale and almost dejected. Why did you not join in the applause?

Lord A. I heard nothing but the beating of my heart—I saw nothing but you. It is the child that expresses its delight by clapping its hands.

Bel. Just so!

Lord A. [Impatiently.] Selwyn, don’t be a fool.

Bel. Just what I was going to say.

[Re-enter Waiter with tray, on which are Letters, Newspapers, Bouquets, and a Case of Jewelry.

Mal. Bravo! More offerings at your shrine.

Julia. What a bore! Do see what the things are. Here’s good creatures—amuse yourselves while I finish this note.

[Waiter places articles on Table.r. h., and Exit with Salver. Maltravers and Selwyn each open a Letter.

Mal. Signed, “An Unknown Admirer.” [Heads.] “Queen of my soul.”

Sei. [Opens another.] This one is signed, “Your devoted and madly attached X. Y.”

Mal. [Heads.] “Adored Julia! Restore the heart which you have cut from my breast.” This fellow writes like a butcher. “If you are a girl of any feeling,”—feeling with one E—the snob!

Sei. [Heads.] “I cannot offer you wealth, but if a heart”—he spells heart with an h—the Cockney! [Violet sings outside.

Mal. Hark! that girl has not got a bad voice.

Lord A. I should know that song. [Maltravers goes to window.

Mal. [At the window.] It is a little beggar-girl in the street.

Lord A. [Going up to window and looking out.] Ah! ’tis she!

Julia. She! [Lord Arthur throws out money.

Lord A. Poor girl! I had almost forgotten her. [Advances] Last week, while taking an early morning walk in the country, my attention was attracted by the voice of a girl crying piteously. I leaped a hedge and found myself in a bye lane. There, by the side of a ditch, sat a ragged girl—beside her was stretched a dead dog.
Mal: A dead dog!
Lord A: As well as her grief would permit her to speak, she related to me, that this animal was her sole friend in the world—her companion!—by exhibiting his tricks and by singing her ballads, she gained her livelihood. The previous night, as they journeyed along to this town, a man had attacked her in the lane, with insult; she uttered a cry for help—her dog flew at the ruffian's throat—during their struggle she fled—all night she remained concealed in a corn-field—at daylight she ventured out to find her companion.
Mal: The man had killed it, I presume.
Lord A: Quite so—as Selwyn was going to say.—Well, I drew her from the spot, but she carried the dead creature in her arms, sobbing over it, until I thought her little heart would break. I made some laborers at a neighboring farm bury the animal; then I placed some money in her hand, and recommended her to the care of the farmer’s wife.
Julia: How intensely interesting!
Mal: Deadly lively! [Arthur goes up to window and looks out.]
Sei: Just what I was going to say.
Enter Waiter, with a card.
Julia: [Heads.] "Mr. Grimaldi earnestly and respectfully begs a few minutes interview."
Mal: Grimaldi!—What’s that?
Julia: [Rising.] A horrible old man—an Italian or Frenchman, I don’t know which. He is attached to the theatre here, for general utility, which means no utility at all. He is lamp-lighter, door-keeper, super—anything—he is broken down and fit for nothing; but he is so obsequious—so dreadfully polite,—it is quite overpowering. [To Waiter] Send him away.
Mal: No, no—perhaps the fellow is amusing—do let us have him up.
Sei: Oh, yes!—do—by Jove! [Crosses to r. c.]
Julia: He is a mere rag—a disgrace to our profession.
Mal: Never mind, let us see the specimen.
Julia: Well, show in Mr. Grimaldi. [Exit Waiter, c r.] What can he want with me?
Lord A: [At window.] Poor girl! how patiently she takes the jibes and insults of the crowd.
Julia: This fellow is the ridicule of the audience, but in spite of our jeers and hisses, he clings to our profession, for which his jargon of broken English unfits him altogether.
Re-enter Waiter.
Waiter: Mr. Grimaldi.
Enter Grimaldi.
Grim: Mademoiselle—Messieurs—pardon, mille excuses, I intrude myself, to place at your feet my homage—permettez. [Maltravers crosses to L. c.]
Mal: [Aside] What a figure! [Eyes him as he passes.]
Sei: Quite so.
Lord A: What a thing of shreds and patches.
Julia: [Supercilious.] Well, Mr. Grimaldi, to what do I owe the pleasure of your call? [Seats herself at table l, H. chair.]
Grim: Superbe—Ah! when I look at you, I bless de day that I have lived to see such—Ah! superbe! Messieurs, I have seen Talma, Mess O'Nil—Madame Sit-down.
Mal: Madame sit down!
Julia: Mrs. Siddons, he means.
ACT I

SCENE I

[Grim and Mme. Sitdonn are speaking to Julia.]

Grim: C'est ja—Mme. Sitdonn—mais pouah !all dat was nossing, near to Mademoiselle. You have seen Grisi. She sing well, belle voix ! Mais de voice of Matnzelie—ah! parlez nous de cela—seraphique, Messieurs, seraphique.

Julia: How clever the French are at description!

Grim: Ah, Mademoiselle, I have next week a little benefits. For two weeks past I say to myself, "Grimaldi, if you not make something by your benefits, how shall you pay your tailleur I"

Mal: [Eyeing his coat.] If you never paid him at all it would only be justice.

Julia: I don't understand you.

Grim: Mademoiselle, pardon. I intrude myself to ask you, for what terms you would play for my benefits?

Julia: Play for your benefit! The man is mad!

Grim: It would give to me bread for the winter—it would be charity.

Julia: My good man, what could induce you to entertain such a hope?

Grim: Because you play for de Hospital last night, de Hospital is rich—de Hospital did not want it—but I am poor, and I do want—oh, oui. And I—as I was a fellow artiste—

Julia: A fellow artist—you—you—this is too ridiculous. Why you old buffoon—

Grim: Bouffon!

Julia: Return to your native land, where you may still earn a crust as a Polichinelle.

Grim: Polichinelle! Oh! c'est trop! Mademoiselle, it is now nearly forty years I act with Talma—oui Talma—I had b'lt.lwo words to say, out, Messieurs, two words only; but when he speak, I tremble, as ho proceed, he grow before large, grand, geant. No more—he was a man, he became to me a god—my cue arrive—I have no word. I could not, terreur choked me den, I became a puppet—oh oui—den I was a Polichinelle! Ten years ago. I act with Rachel; dat time I had nossin at all to say. I was to be her assassin, I had to strike a blow—no more—she plead to me for life; I advance; she fix her eyes on me; I am root to de ground; her voice of agonie, of tears, her cry for mercy, make quail my heart, and suspend my life—she open her arms to receive de blow, I cast away de knife, and at her feet I demand her pardon—den I also was a puppet—a Polichinelle—but now, [crosses his arms] Mademoiselle, I act wid you, I see your eyes fix on de private box—I see your stereotype smile on de parqnette. your tear artifi-cial, your laugh mechanique, while I—I wiz my little word to say—I say it badly, ze publique laugh—oui, hiss me, but de tear of feeling was in my eye, oui—I laugh wid my heart, I act wid my soul, eh bien—den—I—morbleu, I was de artiste, and you—oui—you was de Polichinelle! [Julia rises in anger, uttering an exclamation..] Pardon—oh, pardon; Mademoiselle I shall forget myself—you are a lady. I should accept your derision, wid courtoisie—en gentilhomme, pardon for my intrusion—je me retire.

Julia: There, there! say no more.
I accept your apology; if you are in want, why did you not say so—here is ten pounds.

Grim. No,—Mademoiselle; no, I am artiste, not a beggar. We receive only from the publique—they come, they pay us for our tears—for our joy, and we do our best to satisfy zem. I shall take de sixpence which de artisan pay at the door, it shall not humiliate me, but de ten pounds you give me, dat I shall not earn—’tis de alms of charity. Je le refuse.

Mal. What an odd creature..

Set., Quite so.

Lord A. That creature has the soul of a gentleman under his rags.

Sei. Just what I was-going to say.

Grim. Adieu, Mademoiselle. [Violet sings outside^

Mal. Hollo! Arthur—here’s your canine acquaintance again,

Julia. Ah! Mr. Grimaldi, stay a moment—you want somebody to play for your benefit—there’s a girl outside will just suit you.

Mal. Ha! ha! excellent—let us call her in. [He beckons fiom the window] Ring the bell. Selwyn.

Julia. Let us have a display of her artistic powers.

Grim. Une chanteuse des rues—a street singer. Ah! dey’would joke me! ah, well! / [Crosses to r.. corner.

Lord A. [Advancing.] I entreat that you will not submit the poor girl to ridicule. [Jfusfc.

Mal, Oh! na [Looking off, c. d.] Here she come*—ah! the waiter stops her. Let her up—let her pass. [He advance*.

Enter Violet, c. d. 1.

Violet. Did you call me, gentlemen?

Grim. Pauvre petite!

Mal. Don’t be alarmed. [Takes her by the hand.] Here’s an old friend of yours.

Violet. Ah! ’tis he-----

Mal. How the girl trembles---------

Lord A. Do not be frightened. [Crosses to her, l. c.] You remember me!

Violet. Oh! yes—T see you every day.

Lord A. Every day!

Violet. When I have earned enough to buy my daily bread, I go to the gate of the barracks, where you live, and watch for you.

Lord A. I have never seen you there.

Violet. No. When I see you coming, I go away.

Lord A. Why do you watch me 1

Violet. Because you remind me of poor Snuff

Mal. Snuff.

Violet. My dog. [All laugh.] Why do you laugh! Ah! you have brothers, sisters and mothers to love you—you laugh, because you are rich, while I had nothing but my poor dog who loved me.

Grim. Pauvre petite!

Violet. He was only a dog, to be sure, but he was kinder to me than any human creature has been. When we had earned nothing, and had nothing but a small loaf between us, he would never eat his half, but would pretend not to be hungry; and then when I had eaten it all, he would run away, and sometimes steal scraps. I told him it was a sin—but poor dogs know no better—he would do it—poor Snuff!

Julia. The child is a fool.

Grim. Yes, she has more heart than head—imbecile! She will be a beggar always—helas!
Violet: So I pretended to eat all my bread, and then I went and hid the biggest Half where I knew he could find it. But I am afraid it did him no good, because sometimes he would go out at night, and come back with a great loaf, or a cold chicken in his mouth, and lay it at my feet; but I don’t think he could have come by it honestly. [A-- laugh.

Julia: Snuff was quite a treasure.

Violet: Oh, I loved him with all my heart!--and when he--he--died, I had nothing to love or care for.

Julia: You had yourself.

Violet: Yes; but a person can’t love themselves, as they can love somebody else!

Grim: Pauvre enfant. Sacristie!

Lord A: And what is your name?

Violet: Violet.

Julia: What else?

Violet: That’s all. 

Mal: Where are your parents?

Violet: I never had any parents. I was found on the bank of the canal, in a basket, with some bouquets of violets, which a flower girl had left there; they said she had drowned herself.

Lord A: And so you were called Violet.

Violet: Yes, sir.

Julia: Well, Violet, [Crosses to r o] we want you to sing us a song; this old gentleman is a great judge.

Violet: What shall I sing you? “Auld Robin Gray”--“A Life on the Ocean Wave”--“The Old Arm Chair”--“My poor Dog Tray.”

Julia: Give us that.

Violet: My poor dog--I fear ma'am--I forget--no, I had rather not sing that.

Julia: Why not?

Violet: Because it makes me think of------

Julia: Your own dog! Well, that will make you give expression to the words. Come.

Grim: Oh, oui! suffer a little; it will please de kind lady. [Aside] Amiable tigresse, va!

Julia: Silence, gentlemen.

Violet--Sings.

When I parted from Sheelah, and bade her good bye,
Wid the smile on her lip, but the tear in her eye,
God bless you, dear Patrick, was all she could say,
And be kind, for my sake, to our poor dog Tray.
Oh then, many a weary long mile we have told,
And night after night found us hungry and cold,
How snugly we slept in my old coat of gray,
And he licked me for kindness, my poor dog Tray.

Poor dog, he was faithful and kind, to be sure
And constantly loved me, although I was poor;
But he died at my feet on a cold winter day,
And my heart it was broke for my poor dog Tray.
Now weary the road is, that once was so light,
How dark is the day, though the sun shines so bright,
To the green banks of Shannon, so far far away,
I can never return with my poor dog Tray.

[In the second verse Violet bursts into tears, and falls on Grimaldi's breast.

Grim: Oui. bravo! Sacrebleu, bravo! Ah, you laugh! Riez Messieurs. Riez Mademoiselle, oui, in dis child dere is truth, de germ of art; dere is feeling. De life of art. Listen to me, mon enfant; you are not alone in de world, for God has made the sincere hearts to be all of one famille.
Oui, this morning he looked down from heaven, and
he saw you, young, innocent, and beautiful, and he said, "I must send
that poor child a protector, a father"; and then he looked abroad, and in a miserable chamber, cold, hungry, and alone, he saw an old man, who prayed on his two knees for some help, some comfort to his life. "Oui," he said, "pauvre vieillard, assez souffert, I will send to you comfort to your house, you shall be warm in your hearts, you shall be no more alone." Come, he brought me here, I see you, and the voice of one from heaven now cries in my heart, "Grimaldi, behold your child, I give to you the orphan to protect," and I say, "Mon Dieu! je l'accepte."

[Music—till end of Act.]

Julia. Bravo! Let her appear for your benefit.

Grim. Oui—she shall appear for my benefit there; [Points up,] who will appear for yours?

Julia. Come, I am weary of this melancholy exhibition: go and finish your domestic drama at home, and take that vagabond with you.

Grim. Vagabond! [Julia crosses to table, l.]

Julia. Or must I have you thrust out! [.She rings bell.]

Violet. Or, madam, pardon. [Enters to Julia.]

Grim. No, rise. I leave you, Mademoiselle—I render you mille graces for your reception. [He leads up Violet.] Come, my child, come with me to the old actor's home!

END OF ACT FIRST.

ACT II.

Scene.—An attic—Grimaldi's lodging, poorly furnished—A window at the back, overlooking the roofs of houses—A small charcoal fire in a brazier—A table, with breakfast laid—Bonnet and shawl hanging against wall between door and window—A guitar hangs l. h.—House broom—Grimaldi, with an old dressing gown on, and his sleeves tucked up, is making the breakfast.

Grim. C'est ça. So when Violet wakes she will find everything in order—all arranged. Now, I shall put the breakfast. There, one egg for Violet—two pence of milk—a little roll; ah, comme c'est coquet! Now to make the omelette—[Breaks eggs into a bowl.] un deux, poor child—she must have something to nourish her—[Breaks a bad egg.] Ah, euh! le brigand. [Carries it to the window, and throws it out.] Ah! [He whips the egg with a fork, advances to l. h. door and listens.] She sleeps—sleep well, my Violet. I tell her that I have engaged an old woman to come here every morning to clean up and arrange everything—I do it myself. If she knew, she would rise herself, and not let me— he! he! he! I lock her in. [Fries the omelette in a pan on the brazier.] So, while the omelette cooks, I will arrange myself; tiens—what is it o'clock? [Looks out of window.] Half past seven—so late. Ah, the omelette—[Turns it.] all right. [Dresses himself.] I look charming today. So now—[Dishes the omelette.] beautiful—so all is ready. I shall wake her—stay—let me do it poetically. [Takes down a guitar and sings—he unlocks l. h. door.]
[Scene: The room of Grimaldi, a benefactor to Violet. Violet and Grimaldi are having breakfast.]

Violet: Buona notte.

Grimaldi: Ah, bonjour, ma fille.

Violet: Bonjour mon pere. The room is cleaned up. I see, as usual. How neat and tidy your old servant is.

Grimaldi: Oui, allons! Breakfast is ready.

Violet: [Sits at the table] But when she comes here every morning, why does she always lock one in?

Grimaldi: It is for fear the noise she makes shall awake you. One little egg. [Gives her an egg.]

Violet: Will you never tire of spoiling me, my dear benefactor?

Grimaldi: What is that benefador? You call me bad names? [Threatens her with a spoon.]

Violet: No, mon pere, mon pere.

Grimaldi: Oui, call me so always! Ton pere, I call me always—Omelette! [Gives her omelette] You don't eat.

Violet: I cannot, I am too happy. It is just one year that you brought me, a beggar girl, to this your home; from that moment you have devoted your life to me.

Grimaldi: Ta, Ta! belle affaire.

Violet: You spent your little earnings in buying me dresses, bonnets, shoes, fit for a lady, while you patched up your old rags of clothes.

Grimaldi: My rags! Mademoiselle. A coat I have only had for four years; a pantaloon as good as new—better as new. Cup tea! [Fills out tea.]

Violet: You persuaded the leader of the orchestra to teach me music: he gives me a lesson every Wednesday and Saturday.

Grimaldi: Pardieu. [Aside] It is then only I can wash the clothes.

Violet: You taught me to read and to write—Shakespeare was my spelling-book—Racine and Corneille my masters in French.

Grimaldi: Allons! What have I done, that you throw all these things now in my face?

Violet: I only thought why should you thus lavish your life upon me; for after all I have no claim upon you: I am not your child.

Grimaldi: You are not my child, Violette—you are not my child. Ah no! I forget. Heaven placed a poor young creature in my arms. I nurse her tender heart—I train her voice to call me father, until I forget she is not my child—I teach her helpless mind to walk, and lift up her face to heaven, that it may receive the light. I love my work—my heart fills with pride, and I forget that she is not my child. No. Her father cast away the woman and his little one to shame and want. Her mother chose rather to sleep in death than to wake and watch over her infant. They deserted her, but you, my poor Grimaldi, you did not any of these things, and therefore, voyez vous, she, she cannot be your child.

Violet: No, no. I am—I am—forgive me; am I not yours?

Grimaldi: No, no. You said you were not.

Violet: Kiss me then.

Grimaldi: No, you are not my child.

Violet: You won't—mon pere, mon pere.

Grimaldi: Ah, how beautiful she pronounces that word! I can no more. [Kisses her.] Mon pere, say encore.
ACT I. SCENE I.

[Violet and Grim on stage]

Violet: Mon père.

Grim: Superbe—[Rises.] it is only ten mono she begin to learn French, and she pronounce dat so naturalAh 1 so let us to v^ork, so we •shall rehearsal de scene of your, debut.

Violet: My debut!

Grim: For which occasion, I have myself translated de great tragedy of Corneille, “Les Horaces”, in which Rachel play de part of Camille. Oh, how sublime she is.ven she say—“Rome, seul objet.

Violet: Rome, sole object of my mortal hate.

Grim: No, say like dis. [He repeats the quotation in French, from “Les Horaces,” in imitation of Rachel.]

Violet: But when, papa—oh, when shall I appear?

Grim: If—if I have prepare a surprise for you.

Violet: A surprise!

Grim: One year ago, you remember, I ask Julia to play for my benefits; she refuse, and wid sarcasm point to you, and she say, “go, take away dat vagabond, she shall play for you.”

Violet: I remember.

Grim: Well, to-night is my benefits, and to-night de vagabond shall play for me.

Violet: To-night!

Grim: Forgive me if I did not tell you till now, so have spared, you the terreur, de agonie, dat precede a debut—all is prepared at de theatre. For two, three months I have work for dis night—your success, your triumphe! [Grimaldi goes up and brings down a poster.]

Violet: To-night—

Grim: Look, see! [Unfolds a poster.]

Violet: Mlle.Violet—Oh! what big letters too—as big as Julia’s—

Grim: Twice more big, it impose de publique. Dey have grand respect for all de big letters—dere is no talent dat is talent if it shall not be in big letters. [Hangs up the bill.] But dere is very little talent dat is as big as its letters.

Violet: But my costumes!

Grim: All is prepared—regardez—you shall be divine.

Violet: I tremble in every limb—if there should be a poorhouse?

Grim: Poor house! every seat was taken yesterday at 2 o’clock—•apristi—what a mistake I did not sell zem by auction.

Violet: What do the public know about me?

Grim: What dey know—attendez—you see dis newspaper, it is two mons old—read.la.

Violet: [Reads.] “A beautiful instance of filial devotion. We understand that the lovely and accomplished Miss V----------, whose family were lately reduced to beggary by the failure of Messrs. M. & Co., of Liverpool, has determined to apply her rare talents to the support of her aged father and her infant sisters. A remarkable dramatic genius has been discovered in this young lady, who it is whispered will make her first debut on any stage in this city.” Who can that be?

Grim: ’Tis you—I wrote him, and got him in for nins shilling.

Violet: But my family.
Life of an Actress

Grim: C'est moi—
Violet: My infant sisters.
Grim: (J est moi—est elie difficile—read dis, last month's.
Violet: "The critics of London centre the success of the coming season on the debut of the already celebrated Melle.V---.At a select party at the Countess of B’s, she gave a few readings. Her noble audience were electrilied by the radiance of her genius." But all this is not true.
Grim: Ah, my child—if you want to read what is true, gif me back de newspaper. [A knock.] Come in.
Wop: [Putting in his head at door in JI at.] It's only me.
Grim: Ah, Mr. Wopshot—entrez done. 
[Enter Wopshot, c. d. injlat.]
Violet: Ah, Mr. Wopshot, how dare you come here every morning to rehearse with me, and conceal from me that I was coming oubto-night.
Grim: Dat was my plot to save you de stage frightdat precede a debut—ah! while 1 wash up de cups, you shall rehearsal de love scene of the second act—sacristi—what a success we shall have. [As?de to him.] Keep her up, praise all she do,—allons, to work, you shall eclipse Rachel. [Aside.] Keep her up.
[Wopshot and Violet rehearse.]
Grim: [Aside.] What a success we shall have.
[Exit Grimaldi b. h. d.]
Wop: How lovely she looks—now’s my time. I love her and must tell her so before she is a great actress, as she will be to-morrow. [Aloud.] Miss Violet!
Violet: Eh?
Wop: I—I—nothing. [AmWe.] I feel like a novice. I can't remember a word. [A/owd.] Miss V. rude am I in my speech—no—I mean—my dear Miss Vio—I—I— I am a low comedian, and generally a favorite with the audience. I get thirty shillings a week, and a clear one-third benefit. I am alone in the world, and I—I—[Aside.] I am perspiring all over.
Violet: You are an admirable actor, papa says, and you always make me laugh at you heartily.
Wop: Ah! but I don't want you to laugh at me now. Oh, Miss Violet, I have known you for the past year, I have watched jou from day to day. Your patient toil, your modest little endearing ways, and your tenderness for old Grimaldi. I never did see an angel, but there can't be anything up there better than you, lovelier than you, and more fit to guide a fellow straight up to heaven.
Violet: Oh!
Wop: Them’s my sentiments. I—I— [Faltering.] I wish I had flayed the juvenile tragedy, and per—perhaps I might do it better, but I want to say that I love you. And—and, [Bursting into tears] and I feel I am making a damned fool of myself.
Violet: Oh, Mr. Wopshot, what have I done to hurt your feelings?
Wop: Hurt me! I only wish I could get cut up into ever so small pieces for your soke.
Violet: What can I do for you—tell me, oh, tell me!
Wop: Love me—love me in return!
Violet: I do!
Wop:
[Delighted.] And you accept me--as a husband!

Violet. Eh 1 [S/ar/s.] A husband!

Wop. No--no--[Aside.] Oh, lud--I've been and done it.

Violet. A husband!

Wop. No--no--don't answer all at once! I can wait! Time is no object.

Violet. Love--love! I have read of it, papa has shown me how to act it, but I don't know what it is.

Wop. I can tell you. [(SipAs.] I believe you! When somebody--meaning me--is near you, do you feel simmering at every pore, as if you had too much life in your body, and it was running out all over everywhere?

Violet. Yes!--Yes! [Abstracted]

Wop. [Abstracted] When alone do you feel empty, as if you had fed on nothing but sighs for a month! And when you go to bed, do you pull off one boot and have a dream on the bed-side before you get off the other? Don't your tears prevent your shaving in the morning! And when you do think of what you are, did you ever have such a small notion of yourself before?

Violet. To love--to be haunted by one face--to be alone in the dark when that face is away--to live on light when it is near--to tremble beneath one voice, yet dare anything to hear it.

Wop. That's it--in Tragedy. I could not do it that way; but mine is quite as sincere.

Violet. Then, I do love!

Wop. Me?

Violet. No--another!--but I did not know it until you made me.

Wop. I made love for somebody else! Don't believe me! No, that is--yes! Oh! What have I done!

Violet. I love Lord Arthur Shafton.

Wop. A nobleman!--one of those young officers that used to come hanging about here some months ago--I thought Grimaldi had shut the door against them all.

Violet. So he did.--but twice a week I go to take my music lessons from the old leader of the orchestra, and Lord Arthur meets me on the road--by accident--regularly every Wednesday and Saturday.

Wop. [Aside.] If I tell her that Lord Arthur is a villain, and is bent upon her ruin, she will think that jealousy prompts me to wrong him.

Violet. Speak!

[Enter door c. quickly Maltravers, door in f. r.]

Ah!

Mal. All right [Grosser to r. doirn c.] my charmer! don't be alarmed, I watched the old gentleman until he was out of sight.

Wop. [Aside.] He comes from the lover.

Mal. I say, my good fellow, get out. will you. There's a sovereign, put yourself on the other side of the door, and if there's anybody comes, say there's nobody at home.

Wop. I'm an actor, not a flunkey. [Croseet c.]

Mal. Hollo! The fellow talks as if he were a gentleman.

Wop. I'm sorry that you don't act like one. Good bye, Violet! Look here--you have lost your dog Snuff--but the faithful spirit of that animal survives in me, so if you want anybody strangled for your sake,--just say--that's all, you understand. [Exit, d. f.]

Mal. Now, my angel!
We are alone. For months I have sought this opportunity, but that bird Grimaldi keeps you caged up. You got my letters!

Violet. Yes. I gave them all to my father.

Mal. The devil you did! What did he say?

Violet. He said I must not mind being insulted, because you knew no better.

Mal. He's an old fox, and wants to live upon your exertions. His affection for you is a mere speculation. But I am rich, and can prove my sincerity by sharing with you my wealth.

Violet. He did more. He proved his sincerity by sharing with me his poverty.

Mal. Violet, I adore you to distraction—accept my love, and my fortune shall clear your path to fame. Refuse me, and it shall bar your path.

Violet. Begone!

Mal. The press shall scourge your vanity, and a hired audience can drive you from the stage. Beware how you make me your foe. You do not know of what I am capable.

Violet. Yes, I do. You are capable of insulting a defenceless woman.

Mal. [Seizing her arm.] You think I do not know your secret—you love Lord Arthur.

Violet. How can I help it when I compare him with you?

Mal. Ah, you confess it then! Now listen! You shall be mine—mine by fair means or by foul. You shall sue to me for pity. Those eyes now filled with scorn shall plead with tears.

Violet. Let me go.

Mal. It is not the first time you have struggled in these arms. 'Twas I who met you in the lane, a year ago. I saw your beauty even through your rags, and as you tore yourself from me as you do now, your dog seized me by the throat.

Violet. Oh, why is he not here now to protect me?

Wop. [Looking in.] Do you want me, Violet?

Mal. Confusion! Good-day—Violet, remember what I have said.

[Exit Maltravers, R. C.]

Enter Julia and Selwyn, D. L. F.

Julia. [L. C.] Don't go, Maltravers. Ah, my dear little girl, how do you do—well, I declare, you are quite a credit to that old clown, Grimaldi. He has polished you up amazingly.

Sel. [R.] Yes, by Jove, we are all in love with her.

Violet. [Aside to Wopshot.] Don't leave me, Mr. Wopshot.

Wop. [Aside.] Don't be afraid.

Mal. [R. C.] [Aside to Julia.] What brings you down from London?

Julia. [Aside to Mal.] The newspapers are all in rapturous expectation tonight. Grimaldi has worked up such an excitement that the manager of Drury Lane theatre has actually come down to see her appearance tonight, and yesterday he positively threatened me with a rival, who, he added, would take down my impertinence several pegs.

Sel. Just what I was going to say.

Julia. Now, my dear girl, although your dear old papa has no doubt stuffed your head full of absurd hopes, you must not allow a failure to daunt your ambition. Everybody fails at first.

Wop. [Aside to Violet.] All right. She fears your success, or she would not try to frighten you into a failure.

Julia. Let me give you a few hints that may serve you tonight. When you hear the first hiss, don't show any concern about it.
MAL: No, your friends will put that down.
WOP: With a strong hand. Snuff will be here.
JULIA: And as the people get up, one by one, and go out, don’t notice it.
WOP: Especially, if you see me behind ’em, one by one.
JULIA: In the sentimental scenes, if you hear laughing, don’t give in.
WOP: No, because it will be rapidly followed by a cry.
VIOLET: Can it be possible that my visions of success are all dreams! that my father has exaggerated my merits. Oh, should I fail! 
WOP: Don’t give in, Violet—don’t cry. Look you, Julia, [Crosses to her.] is this fair! is this actor-like, to daunt and scare a poor girl, whose only hope is to earn the support of her aged benefactor; and for you [To Maltravers and Selwyn] to aid in such a scheme—is that what you call a gentlemanly proceeding?
SEI: Well, that was just what I was going to say.
[Enter Arthur.]
VIOLET: Ah! [Runs to him.]
LORD A: Julia. [Crosses to l. c.]
JULIA: Yes, here we are, you see, keeping up this dear girl’s spirits. I have just been giving her the advantage of my own early experience on the stage.
LORD A: I thank you, Julia, for I have followed Violet’s career with the deepest interest.
JULIA: I’m sorry for it. I know what the deep interest of young officers for young actresses always leads to.
SEI: Quite so! Let us have your early experience on that point.
WOP: Julia deceives you; she came here to intimidate, not to encourage, Violet.
JULIA: What is the beggar-girl to me? And who is this man?
[Julia takes c., followed by Wopshot.]
WOP: I’ll tell you who I am. I was call-boy and sweeper, at Richardson’s show, when you were in the ballet. Afterwards I delivered messages in Hull, when you walked on and danced between the pieces. And if I am not at Drury Lane Theatre, in big letters, it is because noble Ionia don't run away with low comedians, and I can’t pay the press. [Crosses to L.]
SEI: Quite a biography, by Jove.
JULIA: Let us withdraw from this pothouse. Come, Lord Arthur.
LORD A: Excuse me, I remain.
JULIA: Oh, I beg pardon; come, Maltravers—give me your arm, Selwyn. [Aside to him.] Had I been a man, I would have knocked that fellow down.
SEI: Yes by Jove, so would I.
JULIA: Bah! [Quits his arm, and goes out with Maltravers.]
WOP: Violet, I suppose you don’t want me any more. Yes, I know—all right.
KYN: [Down to Selwyn.] I think we had better go.
SEI: That’s just what I was going to say. [Exit.]
LORD A: [R.] Dear Violet, I have this moment received a command from the War Office: I am attached to the staff of the commander-in-chief, and I am ordered to embark at once for the Crimea.
VIOLET: [L.] But you will not go!
LORD A: I must, my honor is at stake, and yet I cannot leave you. How can I untwine these dear arms from around me?
Violet: Is not my life yours?—yours was the first hand held out to me in kindness—yours the first voice that spoke to me in pity—so I loved you ; hut I would never have told you so had you not bade me confess it. Speak, now!what shall 1 do!
Lord A: There is but one alternative—I can leave the army, and we can fly.
Violet: From what?
Lord A: From dishonor. Men will brand me as a coward ; but your love will enclose me in a new world, where I shall see nothing but the heaven of your eyes—hear nothing but the throbbing of our hearts.
Violet: And my father--------
J. ord A: He shall be provided for; he may return, enriched, to his native country.
Violet: Ah, I understand, we must fly from my dishonor as well as yours. Oh, dear, dear Arthur, do not ask me to be ungrateful to my father—anything but that. I give myself to you, but don’t make that gift utterly worthless.
Arthur: Dear Violet! [He embraces her.]
Violet: My father—oh I my father ’
[Enter Grimaldi. They separate.]
Grim: Ehl here T am. Ah! Milor—.
Lord A: I just stepped in to—to—
Violet: Yrs—that is—he—
Grim: [Aside.] He looks pale; she weep; aha! I comprehend all. He would take her from me and those tears are for me—helaa! [Aloud.] Violet, my child, go into your room a little, leave us together alone. Hush, a little while—allons. [He leads her in l. h. d.]
Lord A: [Aside] Can ha suspect 1
Grim: Ah, Milor! dat child love you. I have see dat all along, hut she knew it not. You tink perhaps I combat dis love—non. I cherish it, for when I teach her to act, she know not what spirit inspire her, what give light to her eye, glow to her cheek, passion to her voice; but I kr.ow, it was her love for you! So, J was your accomplice to make her love, and you were my accomplice to make her great. Her heart is divide between us; you have tie big half. Well, now, she is a poor child, we are two men, eh! let us consult together how we shall make her happiness; hein—you begin—propose something!
Lord A: I 1what can I propose?
Grim: Take her! she is yours! I yield her to you, you shall be her guide, her protector!
Lord A: Me! but, sir! I scarcely—
Grim: I give you in trust de only fortune she possess—her innocence. It is all to her, it gives freshness Io her voice; grace to every limb; it covers her like a charmed robe; it shall be de secret of her success. De publique shall say, "She is not great artiste—she has not force—but—but, she has something dat touch us dere in de heart—we cannot tell. Eh, bien! it is her innocence."
Lord A: [Aside] And I would have robbed her of it.
Grim: Dere is some in your rank, who would say, "Dat little girl love me, she will pass for me an hour or two, and it will be an honor for the poor beggar-girl to be ruin by a fine gentleman like me."
DEN DE MODERS OF SUCH MEN SMILE AND SAY, "-- AH, MY SON IS A DREADFUL ROU6, BUT HE WILL REFORM WHEN HE IS MARRY." AND, AFTERWARD DE WIFE OF DAT MAN WILL SAY WID PRIDE—OUI WID PRIDE, "AH! WHEN MY HUSBAND WAS YOUNG. I HEAR, HE WAS A LITTLE WILD." OH. OUI! SOME FEW GIRLS HAVE DIE IN DE HOSPITAL OR BY SUICIDE, AN OLD FADER LIES IN HIS GRAVE WID A BROKEN HEART; BAH! DE SILENT EARTH COVER DAT ALL OVER AND DE GENTLEMAN HAS ONLY BEEN A LITTLE WILD.

LORD A: BUT I AM NOT THAT MAN--NO, BY HEAVENI

GRIM: I KNEW YOU WAS NOT.

LORD A: I WILL LEAVE THIS PLACE AT ONCE.

GRIM: HUSH! SHE LISTEN DERE. [GOES AND CLONES L. H. D. .RCHTRNA.] SHE MUST NOT HEAR--EH! BIEN!

LORD A: I WILL LEAVE THE COUNTRY TO-NIGHT.

GRIM: PLUS HAS, WHISPER--POOR CHILD ' SHE LISTEN WID HER HEART.

LORD A: TO-NIGHT! YES, TO-NIGHT. I WILL LEAVE ENGLAND, I HOPE, FOREVER. THE CRIMEA STILL CRAVES FOR LIVES. I WILL VOLUNTEER, AND WHEN I AM GONE, TELL HER SIR. THAT FOR HER SAKE [CROSSES L. IO TABLE.] I--BID HER FAREWELL FOR ME--SAY, WHAT I CANNOT FOR MY TEARS.

GRIM: MONSIEUR, YOU SHALL GO TO DE WAR. YOU SHALL KILL TWO, FIFTY, SIX-HUNDRED MEN--EH! BIEN! YOU SHALL NOT BE SO HERNIQUE AS IN DIS MO- MENT WHEN YOU SPARE A POOR YIELDING WOMAN.

LORD A: ADIEU! [RUSHES OUT.]

GRIM: ADIEU! ELLE EST SAUVEE! [HE FALLS INTO A CHAIR R. H.]

END OF ACT II.

ACT III.

SCENE I.--A TABLE WITH DESSERT--CAUDLES, WINES, ^C.--MAZ-TRAVSHS, LORD ARTHUR, AND SELWYN DISCOVERED--LORD ARTHUR IS FLUSHED WITH DRINK.

MAL: SO YOU REALLY HAVE VOLUNTEERED TO THE CRIMEA 1

LORD A: AY,--WE MARCH AT TEN TO-NIGHT. [DRINKS.]

SEI: WELL--SEBASTOPOL IS WHAT WE MUST ALL COME TO--BUT TO VOLUNTEER IS LIKE COMMITTING SUICIDE.

LORD A: SO DRINK, OLD FELLOW--TUMBLERS THIS TOAST--LET US WET MY COMMISSION AS AIDE-DE-CAMP TO LORD RAGLAN, AND MAY I SOON HAVE <N OPPORTUNITY OF WETTING IT IN BLOOD. [DRINKS.]

SEI: WHAT A HORRIBLE IDEA. [THEY DRINK.]

LORD A: HA! HA! FILL AGAIN-------

MAL: AND SO YOU ARE GOING TP DESERT VIOLET--THAT IS DEVILISH CRUEL, AFTER ALL THE ENCOURAGEMENT SHE GAVE YOU THIS MORNING--TO-NIGHT SHE COMES OUT--THE STREETS ARE CROWDED ALREADY AROUND THE THEATRE. WON'T YOU STOP AND SEE HER SUCCESS?

LORD A: NO--I DARE NOT. IF I SAW HER AGAIN, I FEEL I COULD NOT PART WITH HER. I LEAVE HER FOR EVER, BUT I SHALL ALWAYS LOVE HER TO DIS-TRACTION. I LEAVE HER TO A NOBLER AND SINCERER LOVE THAN MINE.

MAL: HA! DID GRIMALDI POP IN AT THE WRONG MOMENT THIS MORNING! I SEE IT ALL--A SCENE OF INDIGNANT VIRTUE, EH!

LORD A: NO. HE PLACED HER IN MY ARMS, AND SAID, "SHE LOVES YOU. I HAVE NO CLAIM EVEN TO PROTECT HER FROM RUIN--HER HEART IS AT YOUR FEET--TREAD ON IT IF YOU LIKE."

MAL: AND YOU REPLIED-------

LORD A: I REPLIED THAT I WOULD RATHER TRAMPLE UPON MY OWN. [RISES.] AND SO I DO NOW--HA! HA! COME, LET'S DRINK AND FORGET.
Mal. [Rising.] Arthur, you are a fool, and Grimaldi saw it. The old fox looks upon the girl as a speculation; he saw that she loved you, and feared to lose her; he had but one chance to baffle you--and that was an appeal to your feelings--

Lord A. No,--you wrong him.

Mal. Did you offer him an annuity?

Lord A. I tell you, you do not know the man.

Mal. And I tell you, you are a perfect greenhorn--ha! ha! Your romantic heart has been finely duped; and to gratify this old fellow, who is now chuckling in his sleeve at your credulity, you have given up this charming creature who loves you, and banished yourself to the Crimea--ha! ha! What a capital story for our mess.

Lord A. [Sits l.] Oh! have I been deceived?

Mal. I will give you a proof--he shall confess it himself.

Lord A. How?

Mal. Write simply these words, "I hereby undertake to pay Mr. Grimaldi two hundred pounds a year," and sign it. [While Arthur writes--aside.] She is mine at last. [Aloud] You see that does not compromise you or him. Now write to Violet, "I start for the Crimea tonight--farewell." That's well.

Lord A. Stay,--old fellow,--remember my honor is at stake--

Mal. Oh! on my honor as a gentleman, I will make no use of these letters that shall compromise you.

Lord A. But I march with a detachment tonight at ten o'clock.

Mal. Violet shall accompany you--your escort of dragoons around her carriage will make a splendid elopement.

Lord D. You will fail.

Mal. In that case, I will send you word--then mount your charger--ride away, and forget her.

Lord A. If I can.

Mal. Meanwhile, remain here--sleep off the effects of the wine you have drunk.

Lord A. My brain is on fire.

Mal. Come to your room--lean on me. [Exeunt.

[Selwyn, who has gone to sleep during the foregoing, nods, and eventually slips off his chair.

Sei. [Awaking.] Where the devil am I? I have an indefinite notion that I am drunk.

Re-enter Maltravers.

Mal. Now the game is in my hands--this letter to Violet will serve to bait a trap into which she must fall. Where shall I carry her? Let me think of some secure retreat--ah!--there is an old manor-house of mine that lies buried in the forest, about twenty miles from hence; it is so old and lonely, that I have never been able to let it,--I suppose that the old crone to whom I have given house-room there, can find us shelter. Selwyn--

Sei. Ehl

Mal. Are you too drunk to stand?

Sei. No,--I'll stand anything you like to call for.

Mal. Listen--go to the livery stables, and order a carriage and four horses to be at the stage-door of the Theatre at nine o'clock tonight--do you understand?

Sei. All right. A carriage and nine horses to be on the stage at four tonight.

Mal. Idiot! I will see to it myself. [Calls.] Corporal! I hear the guard passing.

Enter Corporal, who salutes.--Two Soldiers appear at R. h. entrance.

Corporal!
Let the detachment of men, going to the Crimea, be in the saddle at 10 o'clock, punctually. Let Lord Arthur's charger be at the door--then, and not till then, rouse him from his sleep, and tell him from me that there is no answer to his letter. Be sure you make no mistake. [Exit.--Corporal and two Soldiers raise Selwyn.]

Sel. C-Corporal, convey me carefully, this side up, and put me in a cool place, where I sha'n't spoil. [One of the Soldiers removes table and chairs during the foregoing. Corporal and other Soldier help Selwyn off.]

Scene TL--The Green Room of the Nottingham Theatre--door in flat, showing the Stage, seen from a. h side. File of bills--call lists--Theatrical Portraits, fyc. Door l. h.

Mrs. Hopkins in a ballet dress, is practising steps before the looking glass. Hopkins walks up and down, studying aloud from a part.--He is dressed as a Roman--groups of ballet girls.

Hop. Inhuman Rome, have I no choice beside, To fail or slay the brother of iny bride?

Call Boy. [Putting his head in at the door.] First music! Everybody for the next piece! [Disappears.]

Hop. Where is Wopshot? He begins the piece.

Enter Wopshot, as First Citizen, in a comic Roman dress.

Wop. Here I am.

Hop. How is the house?

Wop. Rain jam--the public have not got room for their feelings, they are turning away hundreds from the doors already; there has been two fights in the gallery, and a lady squashed in the parquette,--a beautiful house.

Hop. I never knew such an excitement about a first appearance; but you look quite wretched--what's the matter?

Wop. Matter, Hopkins! I love this girl--I would give my life to inspire her with a tender thought. Now look at me--I am obliged to redden my nose--stern duty compels me to wear a red wig--imagine my feelings. I am always placed in the most contemptible situations; when the more I try to render myself interesting, the more the public laugh at me; then I get savage, and then they roar--the inhuman monsters!

Enter Grimaldi, half dressed.

Grim. Ah ' mes amis, my friends, what a triomphe; de public is pack in de house like sardines in a box: it is the grand moment for my child. You shall all keep her ups, eh!

Hop. Rely on us.

Grim. She is so timide.

Mrs. H. The best thing in the world for that is a little sherry and a raw egg.

Call Boy. [Appearing at door.] Every body down to begin. [Disappears.]

Grim. To begin! Ah! my heart is in my mouse--all my hopes, my dreams, shall be realize or vanish dis night.

Wop. All mine vanished this morning.

Enter Violet, dressed as Camille.

Grim. Mon enfant.

Wop. Look at that, Hopkins, look at that.

Violet. Oh, papa! I am so nervous I can scarcely speak. I cannot remember a word--my head swims round.
ACT I, SCENE I

[Grim and Madame Hopkins enter, followed by Violet.]

Grim: Courage! Here is Mr. Hopkins, Madame Hopkins. Keep her up.

Hop: Don't be afraid; once you are on the stage, the foot-lights will restore your courage.

Wop: Look at her.

Violet: I shall fail—I feel I shall fail---

Grim: What an idea—ha, ha! fail—keep her up!

Wop: Look at her.

Call Bop: [Appearing—reads from list.] Mr. Hopkins—Mr. Wop-shot. You are called, please. [Disappears.—Exit Hopkins.]

Mrs. H.: Don't take on so, dear—how she shivers—her hands are as cold as ice. I'll send out for the sherry and eggs, and make it myself. There, girls, come away, she is better alone. [Exit Mrs. Hopkins, followed by the Ballet.]

Wop: Look at her.

Grim: You tremble, my child---

Violet: I-I can't help it.

Grim: Courage—voyons—you make me tremble also. You weep now—ah! sapristi, you must not cry, you wash off all de rouge from your cheek.

Wop: Get out—let her cry, it will do her good. [Crying.] I know you think I'm a brute to say so.

Violet: Oh! no, no, I don't.

Wop: But-I-I know it helps-to-to clear off the hysterics—you are better now?

Violet: [Sighing.] Oh, yes; I—I feel relieved.

Grim: Bravo! Here is a pot of rouge; here let me put a leetel rouge on your cheek. Dere, dere—comme-ça.

Wop: You old muff, your hand trembles so, you are rouging the girl's nose. [Violet laughs.]

Grim: Ha! ha! she laughs, tiens! what an old fool I am—eh! ha! ha! ha! [Wopshot rouges her cheek.] Ah! smile so; oh! my Violet—my heart—my child.

Call Boy: [Appearing.] Miss Violet, you are called, please. [Disappears.]

Violet: [Rising.] Ah!

Wop: Now, one effort, and all is over.

Violet: I cannot, my heart chokes me.

Grim: Keep her up.

Wop: How—she will faint—her lips are white.

Grim: Mon Dieu! que faire, Violet—mon enfant. Oh, vat shall I do! Some water—quick. [Runs about distractedly.]

Wop: [Aside.] It will break my heart, but it may revive her. Violet, Vi—Violet, Lord Arthur is in front—succeed, oh, succeed, for—for—his sake.

Violet: [Making a supreme effort.] He—he is there; yes—yes; I must—I will succeed.

Grim: Here is a glass of water.

Call Boy: [Appearing.] Miss Violet—quick, please, the stage waits. [Disappears.]

Wop: Ready; come, come.

Grim: Bless you, my child!

Wop: [Pushes him back.] Stop where you are, you are worse than she is. [Exit with Violet.]
GRIM: Oui, yes, I am worse. Ah! my legs go away. Ah! l’émotion—my head go round. I—I can no more. [Falls into a chair] Oh mon Dieu, mon Dieu, give her de courage to succeed. Hist! Dere, dat is her cue to go on. Now, she enter; noble—simple—ibeautiful. Hush! surely dey see her, yet no applause—no help to keep her ups; miserable public—stupid public, do they not see her. I chok—ahi. [Loud applause] Ah! bravo! bravissimo. C'est ga bon publique—braves gens, dey applaud her, dey applause my child. [Louder applause.] Aha! hurrah!—go on—bravissimo. Ah! mon Dieu—God save de Quin. [.Runs about distractedly] What shall I do. [A third and still louder applause.] Ah! 'tis too much ; merci, bless you, my poor child. Oh! my—my heart [Sofis.J will break for joy.

JULIA: [Rising] Ah! ha, ha, ha! our rivale. Ah! mademoiselle, you despise de poor old actor dat ask your help; you ridicule de tears of the poor beggar girl; you say to takeaway de vagabond, she shall play for your benefits. [Applause.] Hear you dat. Eh! he! what say you now to de Polichinelle?

JULIA: I say that the house is packed; in ten years hence she will be fit to deliver a message. [Applause.]

GRIM: Ah! you tink so—he, he, he! Before one month she will be in London—oui, in London, beside you, when she will blow you out of dewater. [Applause.] Bravo! bravissimo! Hurrah! [Exit.]

JULIA: Oh, I could scratch my own eyes out with vexation!

MALTRAVERS: Julia!

JULIA: Foiled and beaten, she has succeeded. I know the public—it is a hit!

MALTRAVERS: But if I can make her fail.

JULIA: Fail—

MALTRAVERS: In ten minutes, a carriage will be wailing at the stage door. In that carriage Lord Arthur will await Violet, to bid her farewell forever. She will rush to his arms, and before she can recover from his embrace, she will be carried off as fast as four horses can bear her.

JULIA: Carried off in the middle of the play!

MALTRAVERS: Then, when Grimaldi seeks for his protegee in vain, give him this letter—it may clear his doubts as to her destiny.

JULIA: Ah! [Takes the letter.] I have my vengeance still.

MALTRAVERS: And so have I. [Exit—Loud applause.]

JULIA: She comes—

[Hopkins, Mrs. Hopkins, Wopshot—Ballet—escorting Violet enter.]

ALL: [Applauding.] Bravo—bravo!

WOP: Immense! I knew it—I was sure of it—take some water—here some of you—some water—

VIOLET: Oh! where is my father!

WOP: The Manager from London has got him in a corner, offering engagements.

[Call Boy enters.]

CALL BOY: Miss Violet—a letter for you.

VIOLET: For me? [Reads.] Ah!—from Arthur!—“I start for the Crimea to-night—to-night”—What’s the matter!
CALL BOY: A gentleman—an officer—who is in a grand carriage at the stage door----

VIOLET: A shawl—quick—[Mas. Hopkins gives her shawl.] There— I must see him.

WOP: But, my dear Violet, remember you are called in a few minutes.

VIOLET: Lead me to him! No, [Bo Wopshot, who offers to escort her.] I go alone! [Exit with call boy.]

JUHP: [J. side.] She is gone.

WOP: But Violet! Violet! she is mad, [Turns to the window.] yes—there is a carriage and four horses, and there! there is Violet, a man muffled in a cloak lifts her in, he closes the door and leaps upon the box—Hollo! Stop! Stay!

ALL: What is it!

WOP: Despair and treason! She is driven away!

JULIA: Victory—the Held is mine!

Enter Grimaldi.

GRIM: Two hundred pounds a week! And a clear half benefit—yes, I have made dat terms widde great manager of de London Theatre. Congratulate me my—eh! what de debbil you look all so blue at me—where is my child?

CALL B.: [Calling] Miss Violet, you are called, please—

JULIA: Call away.

GRIM: What is dis, speak!

WOP: She is gone!

GRIM: Gone, where, gone!

WOP: In a carriage, just now, with an officer!

GRIM: Oh! [Staggers back.] Violet! no! no!

WOP: The call boy brought her a letter, she read it, and instantly went out and forbade me to follow her.

GRIM: Oh! I dream—no—no! I dream!

JULIA: Perhaps this may awaken you. [Hands Grimaldi a letter.]

GRIM: [Opens it.] What is dis? [Reads.] “I hereby undertake to pay Mr. Grimaldi ^200 a year. Arthur Sh afton.” [Silence.] Eh bien! [Tear up the paper slowly.] It is de illusion of an old man lost and gone. I hoped to make her happy—good, my pride, my hope—well, I was foolish—I, [His courage breaks down, and as he weps.] my poor child! My poor child!

ALL: Shame! Shame!

GRIM: No! no! I am nothing to her, she is not my child! What right have I to reproach? What right have I to weep? What right have I to love! She is gone! Well, I can return to my cold, my lonely home, and pray for her. God—God bless you, my child—my child!

ALL: Shame! Shame!

Enter Lord Arthdb.

WOP: Stop! Look here!

GRIM: He here! Arthur! you. ah! ha, ha! rascal dat I was to doubt her, to doubt you. She is here, eh!

LORD A: Who? Violet.

GRIM: Did she not go wid you in a carriage just now directly?

LORD A: No!

GRIM: Your letter then to me was a forgery.

LORD A: My letter, ah! I see! I have been duped, she is in the power of a villain, who has carried her off by treachery.

GRIM: Malediction—she is lost!

WOP: No! not yet. I watched the road the carriage took, it went towards the forest.
Lord A: You know the road, my charger is at the door, leap on his back, you will find my pistols in the holsters. I will procure a horse and follow you.

Wop: I'm off. Damme I'll do something this time, that people won't laugh at.

Grim: Stop! No, no! Me, me, me first! [Tzusaes out.

Wop: Stay! I'll get up behind. [He makes a gesture of comic despair.] Even fate casts me into low comedy.

[They rush out. Confusion. A Tableau.

END OF ACT III.

ACT IV.

Scene I. - The Manor House - Night - an old-fashioned Room, door t. H. 2 e. - a large ogiec window practicable at back, with folding windows, the sills of which are about two feet from the ground - a table, r. h. in front with candles burning upon it - flashes of lightning art seen, through the windows al back - thunder.

Enter Bridget, l. h. door.

Bridget: This way, my lady.

Enter Violet, l. h. door.

Violet: What a fearful place - why has Arthur brought me here?

Bridget: [Very deaf.] Would you like a fire, Miss?

Violet: For heaven's sake, beg Lord Arthur to come to me at once.

Bridget: A little tea! I have it all ready for you.

Violet: Beseech him to take me back.

Bridget: Make it black - I will, Miss, - I generally take mine mixed. [Going.

Violet: What shall I do? - she is deaf - [Exit Bridget, l. h. door. Cruel, cruel Arthur, to hold me in this suspense. My poor father! - does he know what has become of me! Carried off thus in the middle of the performance - what will they do? - what will they think of me? - I could cry, if a feeling of terror that I cannot control did not possess me.

Re-enter Bridget, with tray, on which are tea-things, ^c.

Bridget: There, Miss, - that will comfort you; master made it with his own hands. [Lays it on table, r. h.

Violet: Ah! he is near me, then. He is here, - thank Heaven!

Bridget: There - sit down - let me pour you out a cup. Master has just stepped round to the stables, and will be here directly. [Violet sits on r. h. of table.] Poor lady - there is a comfortable cup of tea - now I'll return to the kitchen.

Violet: Beg Lord Arthur to hasten here.

Bridget: Eh! Oh, yes. - there ain't no bells in the house - if you want anything, please hollo from the top of the staircase; I shan't hear you, - no - but the watch-dogs in the kitchen will bark, and I shall see 'em. Don't fear; I wish you a good night, Miss. [Exit, l. h. door.

Violet: Good night! Surely Arthur does not intend that I should pass the night here. [Lightning] And what a night. [Thunder.] How the storm rages. [Drinks the cup of tea.] This tea may restore me - for I tremble all over - yet what should I fear! - it is this storm, this old and dark house in the midst of a forest. [Thunder.] I am very foolish to tremble---

Enter Maltravers silently, l. h. door, which he locks, then advances, regarding Violet - he seats himself l. h. of table - she does not hear or see him.
Let me read his letter 'again. [Reads by the candle.] How his hand trembled when he wrote, as my heart does now:--"I start for the Crimea to-night.--Farewell! Arthur." It was then true, although he denied it. Oh, what detains him? [Turns and sees Maltravers; she utters a suppressed exclamation of horror and is transfixed.]

Mal: A pleasant surprise, is it not? Oh, yes! Your eyes do not deceive you-----

Violet: Where am I then?

Mal: You are twenty miles from home, from which you eloped in my carriage. This house is called the Old Manse--it belongs to me, and is inhabited by the old woman you saw, and five watch-dogs.

Violet: You forged this letter, then?

Mal: Incapable, my angel!--a gentleman does not forge. Arthur wrote it, and gave it to me.

Violet: Where is he, then?

Mal: Well, [Looks at his watch,] he started at the head of his troop at ten o'clock--it is now eleven--he is one hour's march--say six miles on the road to London.

Violet: Why have you brought me here?

Mal: Ay--now we come to the point.--First of all, my dear girl, compose yourself. Do you remember my promise, that within one week you should be mine?--you, you grow pale------

Violet: Go on.

Mal: You defied me,--you spurned me with contempt. I saw then for the first time that I could not win your love--you hated me--but I'll conquer that; I like to begin with a little aversion. You will learn by and by to appreciate my passion. You think Arthur loved you--poor misguided poppet! In a drunken bout this evening he lost to me a thousand pounds--in payment I accepted you--and, with that letter, he endorsed you over to me.

Violet: [Awing.] You lie!--yes--there is no word but that to answer you. Oh! go on--go on--you give me courage-----------

Mal: Ahem! you are right--it was a lie--but I meant it for a kind one. I desired to reconcile you to your fate, but you 'will have me your foe--in that case you had better know all: Arthur is gone--believing that, intoxicated with your success to-night, you refused to bid him even "farewell."

Violet: Gone! no, you deceive me; for as we sped along, I looked through the carriage window behind, and by the flashes of the lightning I saw that we were pursued by some one on horseback--'twas he!

Mal: Ah! you remarked that, did you? Well, the same idea struck me; so as we entered the forest, I caused the carriage to stop on the edge of a deep chalk pit that skirts the road. I drew across the track a felled tree, and then we proceeded.

Violet: Murderer! you hurled him into the abyss.

Mal: I should not wonder, for shortly afterwards I heard a noise as of a horse that fell, a crash, and then a cry.

Violet: [Breathless.] Had he escaped, he must have overtaken us.

Mal: That's my calculation.

Violet: I will go back. [Arises.]

Mal: Sit down.

Violet: You will not detain me here by force?

Mal: Oh! dear, no--no, you will stop here.
You cannot stir, your limbs refuse to bear you.
Violet: [Falling into her chair.] It is so.
Mal: The tea you drank contained an opiate; I see it has already taken effect.
Violet: Poisoned! [Awaits back.]
Mal: In an hour you will be powerless. [Raises. Walks up and down the room.]
Violet: [Faintly] A veil comes over my eyes. I am helpless—I am at your mercy. [Falls on her knees.] Pity and spare me.
Mal: Ah! you weep—tears now in those eyes that I have worshipped while they darted scorn back upon my heart; there are prayers upon that lip that has met my love with a curl of contempt.
Violet: [Very faintly.] Hear me. I love another, does not that make me sacred to you? Oh! let me go, and I will never speak of this—I will bear all in silence—I will never charge you with--
Violet: [Sac falls asleep at his feet.]
Mal: She sleeps. [Lightning and thunder.] Violet, Violet—she is powerless. [He kneels beside her.] Pale as death! Oh, proud beauty, how many nights have I passed in gnawing my aching heart, wild with the frantic passion that you inspired; but now you are mine, mine! [Raises her. Crashes.]
The window at the back is dashed open, Grimaldi and Wopshot leap in, their clothes are torn and stained with blood, their boots and trousers are wet and covered with mud, Grimaldi has two cavalry pistols in his hands.
Grimaldi: Ah! at last! [Seizes Malteaverr.]
Mal: [Rising fiercely.] Damnation!
Wopshot: Hold him tight, Grimaldi, and if he kicks, shoot him as you would a tomcat. [Wopshot raises Violet.]
Mal: Ruffians! What means this outrage on my house?
Grimaldi: I come for my child: and if there shall be one hair of her head injured, I come to blow your brains out.
Mal: For what! Because I ran away with a little actress! That would be a good joke.
Grimaldi: Oh, oui, a good joke. You steal my child, and when I fly to help her you fling me down a precipice. With our limbs torn and crushed, we crawl still upon your path, and catch you at last. Well, you have had your joke, now I will have mine.
Wopshot: [Who has lifted Violet to a chair, and has tried to recover her.] Grimaldi, she is poisoned, she is dying!
Grimaldi: Ah! miserable! [Raises the pistol.]
Mal: No, by heaven! She sleeps, in an hour the effect of the narcotic will have passed.
Grimaldi: Dere is more of your joke. Gh! You are a brave man, you. It is by dese means you triumph over a poor helpless girl.
Mal: There is your child. Begone! And do your worst.
Grimaldi: Yes! I take her back to infamy—n'est-ce pas. The fine young officer run away widde actrice—allons, an old story dat—who cares! Actors have no character, actresses have no reputation. Bah! You will laugh it off, and we shall make the best of it.
Mal: What would you have?
Grimaldi: I would have your confession of all dat has take place here tonight, which you shall write there.
Mal:
Ha I ha! You expect me to do that?

Grim: Yes. I do, or I shall tell this story of what takes place here. I say that you poisoned my child to effect her ruin—that I arrived in time to save her honor and to blow your brains out.

Mal: Yes, but you have hesitated; and if you draw a trigger upon me now, you would commit a murder in cold blood.

Grim: Who is to prove that? Not my child, for she is senseless. Not Wopshot!

Wop: I’ll be damned if I would.

Grim: Allons—you shall write.

Mal: If you claim the satisfaction of a gentleman, you shall have it at once.

Grim: No, I want no satisfaction; it is for her—my child, I demand a reparation, and shall have it.

Mal: Never! I defy you and your accomplice. Do your worst. [Rushes to the window.

Grim: Stop! [Grimaldi fires—Maltravers feels himself to see if he is touched.

Mal: Would you murder me?

Grim: No, I missed you on purpose; but if you do not write as I shall dictate, I will not miss you next time.

Mal: Well! Under the threat of your murderous weapon—with two bullies to back the girl, remember that—I will write. [Sits at table.

Grim: [Dictates—Violet referred to.] I confess that I kidnapped Violet Grimaldi—that I drugged her food to accomplish the deed of a villain—the hand of Heaven interfered to protect her innocence. Sign it.

[Maltravers signs.

Mal: There, take it; and you will find that even that paper and the oaths of two low actors will not avail against the word of a gentleman.

Enter Lord Arthur.

Lord A: But my oath will.

Mal: Arthur!

Violet: Ah! Arthur—where—where is he?

Lord A: I was there—I heard all that passed.

Mal: And you would have seen me murdered?

Lord A: Had I been present as your fellow officer, I must have protected you, so I remained outside.

Violet: Arthur! I hear his voice!

Lord A: Violet—dear Violet!

Grim: And now, begone you; and remember when you speak of this night that I hold in my power a proof of your infamy.

Mal: Infamy! Romantic old gentleman! I shall tell this story myself over many a mess-table, with infinite gusto.

Lord A: I will anticipate your pleasure, sir. This story, together with your confession, shall appear tomorrow in the public journals, over my signature.

Mal: You dare not.

Lord A: I shall retire from the regiment, from which you will be cashiered and driven with disgrace.

Mal: Not until you have given me the satisfaction of a gentleman.

Lord A: If you were a gentleman, I might give it; but that letter convicts you as a felon.

Mal: Miserable coward! Do you shelter yourself behind your bullies?

Grim: No! [Tears the paper.] Arthur loves my child, and for his sake I compel you to proclaim her purity.

Lord A: You are right, Grimaldi. The public will require no evidence beyond my word, nor will they ask any proof of the innocence of Violet, when they hear that I have offered her my hand; for, if I have endangered her good name, I can only offer her the shelter and the share of my own.
Violet Arthur—dear, dear Arthur! [Embraces him.
Mal. [Aside.] Infamy and exposure! No! He shall not live to brand me as he threatens. — [Exit.
Lord A. My dearest love! Do you forgive me?
Violet. Oh, Arthur, do not speak thus.
Lord A. Tomorrow, you shall be mine. And then, far from the envious world, we shall live in each other's love. Your father shall never leave us, and may Heaven protect our happiness. [Maltravers appears at the window muffled in a cloak.
My dearest Violet, angel of light, speak! Will you minister to— [Maltravers fires a pistol and disappears—Arthur falls—Violet utters a cry of terror.]
Grim. Malediction! [Rushes to the back, l., looks into the gloom—Wopshot supports Violet, who faints.]
END OF ACT IV.
ACT V.
Scene I,—The Gardens at the Duke of D-------’j Villa, at Chiswick, near London—Garden chairs, Zj-c.
The Duke, Lady Belle Lettres, Julia, and groups of ladies and gentlemen, including Mus. Highly Propper, and Miss Stingwell.—Music, (eight bars of the “ Song of the Purse.")
Julia. Really, my dear Duke, your fete is superb.
Enter Leech.
Leech. Admirable! It is the work of enchantment.
Duke. Ah, Mr. Leech—you are welcome.
Leech. Lady Belle, Mrs. Propper, Miss Stingwell, and the fairest Julia! Your Grace has all the wit, the fashion, and the beauty of London.
Duke. And yet the flower of all flowers has not yet made her appearance—I expect the matchless Violet.
All. Violet! [They advance.]
Leech. Our new theatrical divinity.
Lady B. The Enchantress!
Duke. The public is palpitating with a new emotion. Two months ago she appeared at Drury Lane Theatre, and achieved the most brilliant triumph upon record.
Julia. And now the aristocracy fight for her smiles. Countesses vie with each other who shall exhibit her in their opera boxes. Riches, honors, coronets fall at her feet—who last year begged her bread in the streets of Nottingham.
Leech. Her picture is in every window. The mania has spread to coffee-houses, and thence all trades have caught the infection—“The Violet Scarf.” “The Violet Polka” ‘The Violet Bonnet,”—and even “the Violet Shaving-soap,” have shared her success—and today, I observed the last new fashion in trousers—its color was—Violet!
Enter Selwyn.
Sei. Quite so! [He has a pair of violet-colored trousers on.]
All. Bravo! Ha! ha!
Sei. What are you laughing at? I am one of the professed admirers of the charmer; I am one of the Violet Club. You remember that the knights of old always wore their ladies' colors in their helmets—so, we their descendants—
LEECH: Wear your ladies’ colors at the other extremity.
SRL: Just what I was going to say.
ALL: Ha! ha!
DUKE: Her success with our nobility is. I confess, mainly owing to the report that she is privately married to Lord Arthur Shafton.
JULIA: That report has been circulated to cloak a certain elopement—
LEECH: With Captain Maltravers--------
LADYB: No—with Lord Arthur----------
JUHA: Nobody knows anything about it. On the night of Violet's elopement, Lord Arthur suddenly disappeared. Since then, his fate has been enveloped in mystery.
SCL: Maltravers volunteered to take his place, and went to the Crimea, and fell like a hero at the fatal charge at Balaclava.
DUKE: Poor Maltravers—he was a noble fellow.
LEECH: Brave as a lion, and kind as a woman.
DUKE: But what says the mother of Lord Arthur at his disappearance?
JULIA: There is a strange story in theatrical circles, of a duel between his lordship and Maltravers, in which Arthur fell, and his death has been hushed up.
SEI: In the clubs they say that he has married Violet, and is hiding away from his old gorgon of a mother, Lady Beaumaris, whom he fears like the Devil.
LEECH: The press hint at a certain charming Calypso arrangement,—where the lost lord is enjoying himself like Telemachus..
DUKE: The matter will soon be investigated, as I understand that the Countess of Beaumaris arrived in London yesterday.
JUBA: She avows her purpose openly. She has come to vindicate her son from the charge of having allied the noblest family in Britain with the blood of a vagabond.
DUKE: The Countess here--------
SCL: “The spirit of my mother—and in arms—all is not well.”
DUKE: Hush! They are here--------
[Enter Grimaldi and Violet.]
LEECH: Mademoiselle—I am delighted to receive you—Mr. Grimaldi. [Bows.]
GRIM: Ah, Duke! I fear dat we are late, but dis morning her Majesty sent de Countess of Gloucester for Violet.
LEECH: The Countess of Gloucester!
LADYB: You saw the Queen!
MRS. H. P.: I suppose she looked at you through an opera-glass—from a great distance---
VIOLET: No,—she took me by the hand and asked me many questions, then she led me to the nursery and introduced me to the Princess.
LEECH: The royal family!
LADYB: What did you do?
VIOLET: I kissed the little ones.
MRS. H. P.: Little ones! She calls the royal family little ones.
VIOLET: And then I sang them a song.
SEI: Something from Norma!
VIOLET: No, I sang them "My Poor Dog Tray!"
LADYB: Were you not frightened?
VIOLET: No, Madam,—her Majesty did nothing to frighten me.
DUKE: [Aloud] Her simplicity is captivating. Allow me to offer you my arm.
LADYB: Pray present me, Duke.
MRS. H. P.: And me—I pray.
MISS S.: And me.
[They crowd round, and as the Duke introduces Violet they go up.]
JULIA: See how they throng around her—she did not notice me even with a look.
SEI: She did not betray the smallest emotion at my trousers.
DUKE: The idea is excellent! What say you, ladies—shall we lunch here in the gardens al fresco.
All: Oh, yes! al fresco -- admirable.
Duke: I will give orders to have the service laid here.
Julia: No, let us dispense with the presence of domestics -- let us serve ourselves.
Grim: C'est ga, allons! e'est ties Boccace. Let us proclaim a republique.
All: Bravo!
Grim: Liberty, egality, fraternity.
Sei: That is, every one for himself.
Grim: Juste, aux armes!
All: To arms! ha! ha!
[Enter Servants, bearing viands, etc.]
[The party take the table cloths, baskets of wine and plates, knives, forks, spoons, etc., and lay them upon the ground, forming rapidly a fete champetre. The servants return. The party seat themselves upon the ground.]
Duke: Now, my friends, follow the Irish motto -- "Don't be bashful."
Scl.(l.): I prefer the American -- "Help yourselves."
Grim, (r.): Bravissimo, c'est tr6s Boccace -- I shall mix de salade.
Lady B.: Mr. Grimaldi, are you any relation to the clown who bore that name?
Grim: Madame, I had not dat honor!
Lady B.: What were you before you were an actor!
Grim: Madame, I was a duke.
All: Hal ha! ha!
Sei: Duke of chicken salad.
Grim: I almost forget, it is so long ago. Let me see, it was Duka of -- of -- Ah! Saint Elmo.
All: Bravo! Here's to the Duke of Saint Elmo. Ha! ha!
Duke: By the way, now I recollect; Grimaldi was the family name of the great Italian dukes of St. Elmo: the title is extinct, is it not?
Grim: Yes!
Duke: If I remember right, the last Duke of St. Elmo, Gaetano Grimaldi, embraced the cause of Murat.
Grim: It is possible.
Duke: When Murat fell, the Borbon king confiscated the St. Elmo estates, and the Duke was executed for high treason.
Grim: History says, he was assassinated, privately, in prison.
Sei: Let us drink his health, anyhow.
All: Bravo!
Duke: Hold, gentlemen, the first health drank to-day, I reserve to myself the right to propose.
All: Hear! hear!
Duke: I give you a name, whose lustre shall be its only preface -- Violet! and may we not add, Viscountess Shafton!
All: Violet -- Viscountess Shafton!
[They raise their glasses.]
[Enter the Countess of Beaumaris, preceded by two footmen.]
Count: Stay, gentlemen -- to that pledge I must reply.
All: The Countess!
Duke: Lady Beaumaris!
Grim: Sapristi!
Sei: There's going to be a dem row!
Count: Pardon my intrusion, Duke.
Duke: Your ladyship's presence is an honor that admits of no apology.
Count: I have come to ask your grace a favor. I desire to be presented to a lady here, [Looks around.] whom the public have given to me for a daughter-in-law.
Duke: Countess, I implore you to forbear, this is scarcely a time or place.
Count: Excuse me, Duke; this morning her Majesty received the lady with distinction; it is full time that I should know the member of my family who has been so honored, and this place, which your grace selected to present the Viscountess Shafton to your guests, is, I presume, a fitting one, to introduce her to her mother.
Duke: [Advancing to Violet] Lady Beaumaris, permit me to present to you a lady whose genius first won, but whose virtues have since commanded my deep admiration and profound respect. [Two passes Violet across.]
Grim: Merdi! Monseigneur! oh, your coronet is not on your brow—it is on your heart. [Violet curtsies—The Countess scans her haughtily.]
Count: May I beg, madame, a few moments interview in private!
Duke: Oh! Countess—we will cede you the place. Come my friends, let us adjourn to the conservatory. [To servants.] Remove these services. [The servants re-enter, the viands are removed, they all go out.]
Grim: [Aside to Violet.] Courage!—[Lingering.] Madame, I am de fader adoptif of Mademoiselle.
Count: I do not require you, sir—favor me with your absence.
Grim: Madame, I retire myself—what an agr&able old hippopotame I [Exit, telegraphing courage to Violet. Countess turns and sees him.] Madame! quel mastodon! [Exit.]
[A pause.]
Count: [Seated p.] You tremble! compose yourself. I know all your career, and the conspiracy between you and your tutor to entrap my son into a marriage.
Violet: I never had the madness to hope it!
Count: But you have had the assurance to pretend it.
Violet: I never stated, madame, that I was your son's wife.
Count: You prevaricate—you cherished the scandal—and I see a wedding ring upon your finger. Have you the right to wear it? You are silent. I do not desire you to confess the relations that may have subsisted between yourself and my son. I merely require that his name shall not be mixed up with yours. You hesitate because your theatrical success has been assisted by this public scandal. Well, I am prepared to indemnify you for any loss you may sustain.
Violet: I do not understand you!
Count: My son loved you. I do respect even the vices of my race, but I desire to detach you from his mind. I will therefore give you ten thousand pounds, if you will consent at once to marry some person in your own profession.
Violet: There is no person, madame, in my profession, who would consent to marry a nobleman’s mistress for the price of her infamy!
Count: Ha! you raise your "Voice too loud!
Violet: No! despise me! crush me if you will! you are Arthur’s mother—but the profession I have been taught to love and respect. When you trample upon that, you insult my father, and you pollute the daily bread that God has given me!
Grim: [Entering.] Bravo’ Bravissimo!
Count: Dare you to outrage me by a performance of indignant virtue! Enter Duke, Leech, Julia, Selwyn, Lady Belle, Mrs. H. Propper, Miss Stingwell.
Oh! my lord Duke, your return is well timed. This young person, urged, I presume by bad advice—
Grim: Dat means me—go on.
Count: Has circulated a report that she is the wife of my son. She has even desired to carry her imposture to the foot of the throne. The Queen has this day bestowed marks of favor upon her, of which any of our nobility would feel proud.
Grim: Pardon—Her Majesty sent for us; de nobility seek us—wo do nothing—we circulate no report.
Count: You deny, then 1
Grim: No, we are silent.
Count: T understand the subterfuge.
Duke: I think, sir, that whatever reasons may have existed for a prudent silence, the emergency now demands an explanation.
Count: You forget, Duke, that we are dealing with actors, people whose sentiments are manufactured for them, and whose characters are fictitious.
Julia: No, madam, you are dealing with those in whose hearts there has ever been more true nobility than in your own titled caste. We have our jealousies, our hates; but when we hear our noble profession insulted, wc cast aside all petty rivalry, and heart to heart we repel the aggression with derision and contempt. [Crosses to Violet.]
Grim: 'Bravo! come to my arms. She is a noble heart, after all.
Duke: Mr. Grimaldi. I entreat you to justify your daughter, and release me from this painful scene.
Julia: Speak, Violet, for the sake of our profession—speak, if you can.
Sei: Yes. dem it, but she can't; it is a difficult thing to acknowledge.
Count: My Lord Duke, my errand is accomplished. I brand that young woman as an impostor, and those persons about her as accomplices in this conspiracy. They have insulted the aristocracy, imposed upon the Queen herself, and dragged a noble name through the mire of their profession.
Enter Lord Arthur.
Lord A.: Hold!
All: Lord Arthur!
Count: My son!
Violet: Ah! [Jians to him, and is clasped to his breast.]
Grim: There's a picture! Oh! if 1 had qnly a pan of red fire!
Lord A.: Violet!—my love!—my wife!
All: His wife!
Lord A.: Forgive me, Violet, you have kept your promise nobly. [To Countess] I heard, madam, of your arrival in town. I hastened to your house, and learned that you had come hither, with what purpose 1 guessed too*well. If I have kept from you the secret of my happiness, you must blame your own severity. I dared not confess my marriage to you, and rather than wound your pride, this weeping angel consented to a disgraceful secrecy. My love for you made me a contemptible coward, for I sheltered my fears behind her shame.
Count: [Jiising.] Madam, you are my son’s wife, it seems; but to enjoy the honors of his rank, to move in our society, requires that his family should recognize you. I disown, I disclaim you. I banish you utterly from the world you covet.
Arthur: Mother—
Count: Farewell—
Grim: Stay, madamc—one leetel word—perhaps I shall change your mind.
Count: Never, sir.
Grim: Excusez—grant me one leetel word in private. Permettez. [All go off except Grimaldi, Duke, and the Countess. Duke: Countess, J trust your resolution may be bent. [Exit.]
COUNT: Never, Duke.

GRIM: We shall see. [Hands her a seat.] Madame la Comtesse, the objection you shall have to my child is that she is not noble—she is nameless.

COUNT: Had she been a beggar—we have wealth—but an outcast—

GRIM: Ah! If then she had borne a great name—if she had been the only heiress of a great race—

COUNT: This is folly.

GRIM: Perhaps—listen! You are aware, Comtesse, that by the laws of Italy, when a noble house shall have no child, it is permitted to adopt one, to bear the title and continue the name so that it shall not die.

COUNT: At Naples, there is such a law.

GRIM: And if Violet shall inherit a dukedom, that was great even when your house was very little—if they acknowledge her the last of a race that dates from Charlemagne, that were prince and due for hundred years before the Bastard of Normandy stole the English crown, and founded English aristocracy.

COUNT: You rave.

GRIM: No, Madame, Violet is the adopted child of the Duc de Saint Elmo.

COUNT: Your insolence astounds me! Know, sir, to your confusion, that my first husband was Ambassador to Naples, thirty years ago!

GRIM: Ah!

COUNT: There I knew the young Duke of Saint Elmo!

GRIM: You—you—you—your name then was—

COUNT: Lady Windermere—

GRIM: Louise!

COUNT: Sir! [Pause] Louise is my name—but no one—not even my husband was permitted to call me by it.

GRIM: Oui, yes, one other called you so. The young duke, who loved you—who deserted all for your sake—your fascination drew him to the cause of England; he plunged into the plots and intrigues, of which he knew—cared nothing; he had one thought—Louise; the revolution failed, you fled with your husband, and left him to his fate. He was taken, tried, and condemned to death—he smiled gaily at the sentence, and drawing a portrait from his heart, he said to it, adieu, ma belle aimee—adieu, Louise! [He draws out a portrait.]

COUNT: That portrait—my gift to—can it be—Gaetano?

GRIM: Non, non, Madame la Comtesse; if you shall desire it, I shall be simply Gaetano Grimaldi, the acteur, the bouffon—no more.

COUNT: I am astounded.

GRIM: Condemned to suffer death in my prison, my gaoler spared my life at risk of his own, so I was obliged to conceal my name, and earn my bread.

COUNT: But you could have reclaimed your titles long since.

GRIM: For what? I to become a beggar duke—to wear a ragged crown; merci, non. I prefer to be an old artiste, but now that my title and rank can be of some use to Violet.

COUNT: Ah, that girl!

GRIM: Aliens, forgive her, eh!

COUNT: Well, I scarcely can.

GRIM: Oui, you can, you will. [With a smile.] Louisa.