ACT I.

Scene. The garden of a sanatorium at Snuggleton-super-Mare, situated on a cliff overlooking a sea-shore. On the right hand of the stage is seen the exterior of a house.

(Nettletop, dressed in the long wrapper of an invalid, is leaning over a post-and-rail fence, which crosses the back and serves as a guard at the edge of the precipitous cliff. He is examining the beach below through a telescope. Enter Dick, l., followed by a Porter carrying a portmanteau.)

Dick: This must be my destination.

Enter Tucker, from house.

Am I right in presuming that this is Dr. Minimum’s sanatorium?

Tucker: Quite right, sir. Have you engaged a room?

Dick: No; I merely desire to ascertain if a lady, Miss Atalanta Cruiser, is still residing here.

Tucker: Yes, sir.

Dick: (To Porter.) Then you can take my trunk to the hotel. [Exit Porter with portmanteau.] Is Miss Cruiser at home?

Tucker: This is the hour when our ladies bathe, sir; I think you will find her on the beach.

Dick: Thank you. (Exit Tucker.) Dearest Atalanta, how I long to clasp you in my arms again! (Going up, stops.) Stay; this will be rather an awkward meeting after my two years* absence. How shall I manage it? I cannot rush into the waves, and she can’t very well come out; and we can’t embrace at the respectful distance which the occasion imposes! I must await the rising of my Venus from the sea. (Sees Nettletop.) Whom have we here? One of Dr. Minimum’s invalids. What is he about? (Looks over his shoulder.) Oh! he is making a study of the water-nymphs—possibly of my Diana—the dilapidated Actaeon! (Aloud.) Heh! sir.

Nettle: (Pulling bandage over his eye.) Eh?

Dick: Sorry to disturb your astronomical observations.

Nettle: What d’ye mean, sir?

Dick: I thought you were contemplating the heavenly bodies.

Nettle: Can I believe my eye, D-Dick Heartley?

Dick: Why, surely! it is Nettletop!

Nettle: When did you return from America?

Dick: I arrived last night in Liverpool, and grudged every hour that stood between me and Atalanta. The dear girl is as faithful and as fond as ever. See this letter I received ten days ago in New York.

Nettle: (Reads letter given to him by Dick, raising bandage.) “My dear Dick.—C-C-Come back. I am as rich as C-C-Croesus, and as faithful as P-P-Penelope. More when we meet.—Atalanta.”

Dick: I left her two years ago as poor as a mouse; what has happened to her?

Nettle: She has picked up an old Nabob, who, not having a hand free from gout to offer, has adopted her. She is making fireworks of Old Chutnee’s money. Her last piece of extravagance was sending for you; and so you have come all the way from America to get married. Take a friend’s advice—g-go back again.

Dick: Why so?

Nettle: Look at me: give me your candid opinion on my personal appearance.

Dick: You look as if you had taken something that had disagreed with you.

Nettle: That’s it. I t-t-took a wife! Study me! I deserve to be exposed in a b-b-bottle at the Anatomical Museum, labeled “Practical result of six months’s-s-steady matrimony on an able-b-b-bodied subject.
Dick: You have a wife?

Nettle: Yes—that is, I had—but, as we are d-divorced, I suppose I must c-consider her my widow.

Dick: Divorced! My dear Tom (advancing, r., doun), I have not heard of this misfortune.

Nettle: A year ago I fell in love—not trivially, as you may do; but madly, as natures like mine love.

Dick: Mistaking violence for passion, and ill-temper for sincerity.

Nettle: I had a score of rivals—poor things—mere adjec-tives, to which the substantive love was always wanting. I soon disposed of them; and then—oh, had you seen, Dick, how she loved me!—bow abject—how wretched she was! It was heavenly—she was all mine! Well, we were married.

Dick: That produced a lucid interval, I suppose?

Nettle: Not two months elapsed before my rivals began to re-appear.

Dick: I perceive—having the substantive in you, a number of adjectives hastened to qualify your position.

Nettle: From that moment I had only a share in her eyes, and a small dividend in her smiles.

Dick: Many husbands would have felt proud of the admiration she excited.

Nettle: Pr-proud! I did not take a wife for the gratification of my friends. D-damn it, a fellow can wall in his house and grounds, and s-s-stick up a board to warn off intruders; but they can swarm round his wife like flies on a 1-1-lump of sugar, and he’s obliged to say, politely, “G-g-go it, you’re very welcome!”

Dick: What could you expect? You married a belle!

Nettle: I did not expect to find my bell provided with more than one clapper.

Dick: What did you do?

Nettle: Do! I quarreled with all my acquaintances, and remonstrated with her upon the public character of her attractions. She called me a nas-nas—

Dick, (suggesting), An ass!

Nettle: N-no, sir! a n-nasty tyrant, and encouraged admiration mor<i than ever. Driven frantic with jealousy, I employed a detective to watch her visitors, and passed my life in laying traps to catch my own dishonor. I practiced upon her with love-letters, and watched in agony the smile she bestowed on the extravagant expressions they contained. I p-pretended business in the country, that I might return in disguise to my own roof, which I re-entered, like a thief, at night. My conduct became notorious.

Dick: What did she do?

Nettle: To preserve her reputation, she left my house. Then I set no bounds to my frenzy! To exhibit my indifference, I pretended to profligacy, and paraded my infidelity. She applied for a divorce. I never thought she meant it, but she did. Finding I had proceeded too far, I rushed to my outraged Isabelle, to obtain her forgiveness. She refused to see me. I wrote her a full confession of my folly. She p-published the particulars: See Nettletop v. Nettletop—decree against defendant, with costs! Costs! They were nothing compared to my agony!

Dick: What a ridiculous figure you must have cut in the eye of the world!

Nettle: Eye of the world be hanged, sir! Think what a figure I cut in my own eye, when I discovered that I loved her more desperately than ever! Since then, banished from her society, I am obliged to use disguises to approach her unobserved.
I followed her down here, where she has come down on a visit to Atalanta. They live yonder. Disguised in these bandages, I can hobble round her abode--hear her voice--watch for the light in her bed-room--see it extinguished--and think how often toe disputed which of us should p-put it out!

Dick. Ha! ha! until you did it effectually.

Nettle: Don’t laugh at me, Dick, or I’ll strangle you!

(Dick stops laughing)

Nettle: A fanatic may administer his own mortification, when he cannot abide the whip in the hands of another. (Mrs. Nettletop peals outside.) Hark! I hear her voice! She comes; and with her, as usual, one of my happy rivals. I must retire into my disorder.

Dick: I do not see Atalanta.

(Nettletop resumes his disguise, and goes off, l., as Mrs. Nettletop enters, followed by Sprawley, r.)

Mrs. N.: What detains Miss Cruiser?

Sprawl: She is coming.

Dick: Ah! thanks! I see her.

(Descends the cliff hastily. Sprawley looks after him.)

Mrs. N.: Pray return, Mr. Sprawley, and assist her to ascend the cliff.

Sprawl: (Still looking down.) What is the fellow about?--down he goes--they meet. Ah! oh! I don’t think Miss Cruiser requires my arm. She seems to be amply provided with support.

Mrs. N.: Then don’t let me detain you.

Sprawl: Don’t send me away. I so rarely find you alone.

Mrs. N.: My position obliges me to be circumspect. A woman whose reputation is convalescent should, in matters of flirtation, observe a regimen.

Sprawl: You will never be cured thoroughly of your first husband, until you take a second--similia similibus curantur--one pellet drives out the other--hair of the dog that bit you--don’t you know?

Mrs. N.: I am well satisfied with my brevet rank as widow, having retired from the army of wives on half-pay.

Sprawl: Some say you are desirous of being recalled to active service.

Mrs. N.: What do you mean, Mr. Sprawley?

Sprawl: Oh, no offence! But heaps of fellows who admire you awfully, don’t you know, do say you are too fond of raking up number one; and you enjoy no conversation but that of pitching into—“Oh, no, we never mention him; his name is never heard.”

Mrs. N.: I cannot forget my wrongs.

Sprawl: If you go on remembering, you will wear them out. A woman’s tears are like the photographic bath, and serve to bring the image forth.

Mrs. N.: Ah, sir! The idol that once reigned over my credulous heart is broken!

Sprawl: Yes; but you are preserving the pieces, and your heart can’t dispose of them. Pleasures of memory, don’t you know—“Fond remembrance o’er me stealing”—“Scent of the roses will hang round it still”—
Mrs. N.: Do you mean to insinuate that I entertain any improper feelings toward my late husband?

Sprawl: I only repeat what others say: He is more madly in love with you than ever; and, as he sticks to you like your shadow, why outsiders naturally begin to inquire about the odds as to his chance of the double event.

Mrs. N.: The odds?

Sprawl: I heard business done at six to four, at the “Rag,” last week, on the news reaching the smoking-room that he had followed you down here.

Mrs. N.: This is intolerable!

Sprawl: While you remain single, you are open to speculation.

Mrs. N.: May I ask, Mr. Sprawley, what sort of a book you have made on me?

Sprawl: Well—fact is—the field is reduced to two—me and him—so I backed him heavily.

Mrs. N.: Thus, if you win, you receive me; and, if you lose, you pocket a pecuniary consolation. I perceive that passion has not so blinded your sound young English sense but you have kept an eye open to business. You have insured your love by taking out a policy against despair.

Sprawl: You would prefer me to suffer without any alleviation? How selfish women are!—not satisfied with the pains of love they inflict, they are mortified if the wounds close, and jealous of the smallest progress in the cure.

Mrs. N.: If that be your estimate of my sex, good morning! (Going.)

Sprawl: No! Mrs. Nettletop—hear me!

Mrs. N.: For that sentiment I can accept no excuse.

Sprawl: I withdraw the aspersion.

Mrs. N.: You can’t, sir; there is no apology for the truth. (Exit.)

Sprawl: (Draws out telegram, and reads.) “Newmarket, 12.45—‘Perseverance,’ first; ‘Beauty,’ second. The little mare hugged the winner, neck and neck, until the last few strides; then gave in. Splendid race—‘Cocksure’ nowhere.” That is where I shall be next Monday, unless I can find £5,000 by that time to meet my engagements. When that woman takes me, I can negotiate her acceptance. She’s awfully spooney on me—any one can see that. I wrote to my brother, Lord Gadshill, to inquire about her, and send me reliable particulars. When I’ve seen her accounts I’ll pop. Egad! if, after a hasty marriage, I discovered I had thrown myself away on £500 a year, and a second-hand woman! By Jove I a fellow might as well go somewhere at once as vice-consul—into transportation for life. (Exit, l.)

(Nettletop, who has been concealed, reappears, r., and follows them off, l.)

Enter Dick and Atalanta.

Dick: No, talk to me of yourself. Have you been faithful to me since we parted?

Atal: Pretty well. I have allowed lovers to buzz round me, and I have caught one or two; but only from curiosity, to see if they resembled my Dick.

Dick: Let me forgive you. (Kisses her.) Why don’t you ask me also if I have been faithful to you?

Atal: Because I had rather deceive myself than provoke you to make a fool of me!

Dick: You are an angel!

Atal: Yes, with six thousand a year—the least an angel should have; but I have not told you how this fortune fell upon me. Six months ago, I received a visit from a gentlemanly old ruin in a bath chair, who, being in search of some relation to inherit a fortune accumulated in India, had discovered in me a fifteenth cousin.
Dick: I think you claim me
to be a kind of twentieth, do you not ?

Dick: Ah! do not repudiate that one little drop of your blood that circulates in my heart! (Kisses her.)

Atal: I think that one drop circulates in your lips alone, Dick, for you are always trying to give it back to me. Well, this old gentleman did seem so lonely, so helpless, that I consented to take him on trial. I soon found, though as weak as a purse, he was as peppery as a packet of curry-powder. To me alone he is so gentle, so good, so generous, that I have grown to love him as dearly as he loves me.

Dick: And what did he say when he found me in your heart ?

Atal: He became as jealous as an old lap-dog, when a puppy is introduced to the family rug. At first, he avoided your name; then he wanted to know all about you; and it did not strike me, until he asked, that I never knew who you were. Dick, dear, who are you? I mean, who were your parents?

Dick: That is a sad subject, Atalanta. I never saw my father, for he deserted his wife a few weeks before I was born, leaving her, the most noble and innocent of women, with a blighted name and a broken heart. At her death, I renounced the name my father had disgraced, and assumed that which I bear.

Atal: And has he never relented?—never asked after his son?

Dick: Never! Inhuman—implacable to the last! You asked who I am—I am the child of an angel by a demon!

Atal: Aye, Dick! but you take after your mother.

[Sir Abel enters in a bath chair, wheeled by Doody, r.]

Sir Abel: Don't tell me—I won't be answered—hold your tongue!

Doody: That's right—poke yourself—bile over, and scald everybody about ye! Yah!

Atal: Do you hear?—’tis my old Croesus, quarreling, as usual, with his only companion. Look yonder; that is Doody, an Irish retainer of his—something between a rough terrier and a hedgehog, whom he discharges three times a week; while Doody gives his master warning on the alternate days. Yet those two queer old creatures cannot live out of each other’s sight. Listen!

Sir Abel: You do it to insult me. Don’t deny it. I won’t be contradicted by an Irish bog-trotter.

Doody: Oh, thin, if you think I’m proud of being nurse-maid to an ould mustard-pot like yerself, you’re asthray. There was a fool in my family before I left dear Ballynagoola. Oh, the snug farm we had, and the height of good livin’ we enjoyed!

Sir Abel: Do you hear the sod of turf? Why, you bag of rags, you were born in a pound, where they had put your strayed mother. Your hair was the only roof you ever had over your head. You reached maturity by the help of potato-peelings, and never saw bread except inside the county jail!

Doody: Are ye betther after that?

Sir Abel: And this fellow bemoans his native place, while he swallows five English meals a day, and sleeps in the linen he once helped to make for his betters. He never has a moment’s trouble except when he has a nightmare, and that’s only when he dreams of home.
Doody: Egorra! Isn't it a pity he can't sell fish?
Atal: Doody, how can you exasperate your master in this manner? Can't you hold your tongue?
Sir A: No, he can't--he's a blister at my back.
Doody: Ah, thin, that same would have no dhraw on the likes of ye, for it's your back would take the rise out of the blister H^elf.
Sir A: Win nobody throw this Irishman over the cliff?
Atal: Doody, if you speak another word, I shall be very angry with you.
Doody: It isn't me, miss--it's him.
Atal: My dear Sir Abel, you do not see this gentleman, Mr. Richard Heartley, of whom I have so often spoken.
Sir A: I suppose you want me to say I am glad to see him?
Atal: Yes, you will, for my sake. Come!
Sir A: So, sir, you have come to rob me of my place in this girl's heart.
Dick: Is there not room in it for both of us?
Doody: Long life to it! It's like an Irish jauntin' car, that will hould everybody, and one in the well.
Sir A: I am sure, sir, you wish to place yourself high in my esteem.
Dick: Indeed, I do.
Sir A: Then unship the handle of this chair, and break it over that Irishman's head.
Doody: I'll tell you what it is--I'll wheel ye up before the magistrate, and swear the pace agin ye.
Atal: Doody! come here. [Takes him aside.]
Sir A: Mr. Heartley, by the honesty that stands in your eyes, and challenges my humor, I like you, sir. Don't spoil that good nature of yours by mixing a woman in your affairs. She will be true to you so long as she is not sworn on the altar to love you alone. She will be your slave so long as she is free. But, if you marry her, and make her subordinate, she will be faithful only during your sickness or your misfortune, because for that moment you are reduced below her level.
Dick: These are bitter words, sir.
Sir A: They are the fruits of a bitter experience. Women are the playthings that replace the hoop and the ball; but men are less wise than children--for these laugh at their play, while we shed tears over a broken toy.
Atal: The truth is that, once on a time, your heart has been croqued, and knocked out of the game. Then you turned sulky, and left the ground; and, being too vain to confess your want of skill, you call it all cheating.
Sir A: Provoking puss! when I look at you, I forgive him. There, sir, take her.
Atal: And I will make him happy--only to spite you. I will be faithful to contradict you hourly, and you shall own--
Sir A: That one exception proves the rule. Take me in, Doody; don't you see these fools want to get rid of me? Mr. Heartley, you are welcome. Give me your hand. You are very welcome.
Doody: Ah, thin, it's the purty pair of you that's in it.
Sir A: Who asked you for congratulations?
Doody: Arrah! let me say a dacent word to the gintleman. D'ye think everybody is an ould Bengal tiger like yerself?
Sir A: Do you hear me? I say--take me in.
Doody: Long life t'ye both.
ACT I.

May you live every hour of your lives, and every day be the day before your wedding!

Sir A. Will nobody give me a brickbat—or—

[Page headers and footers removed]

Doody. You are exposin’ yourself now.

Sir A. Oh! you rascally Irish locomotive—you—

Doody. Kape that way till your photograph is done.

Sir A. Ah! ah! you villain. (Throws the cushion at him.)
(Doody draws him out, l.)

Atal. Well, Dick, how do you like him?

Dick. With all my heart.

Atal. Is he not a dear old child?

Dick. I seek to discover what is the charm he exercises over me. I am not wont to yield my feelings so unreservedly.

Atal. He is so wrong-headed and right-hearted together, that his weakness appeals to our good nature.

Dick. Stay, Atalanta! Perhaps it has not struck you that I don’t know the name of your benefactor?

Atal. Did I not mention it in my letter? That is so like me. He is Sir Abel Hotspur.

Dick. Sir—Abel—Hotspur! That—that—

Atal. Why, Dick, how pale you are! What is the matter?

Dick. That man is my father!

Atal. Your father?

Dick. Yes, I believe so. He does not—

Atal. And the fortune I invited you to share is your own inheritance?

Dick. None of mine! His money would scald my hands with shame—his bread would stick in my throat!

Atal. Oh, Dick! What shall we do?

Dick. Defend my mother, who is dead, and cannot defend herself. Her tombstone is blank, and he, on his contrite knees before it, shall write her epitaph, ere I resume his name and re-enter his doors.

Atal. How shall I act between you?

Dick. As a woman should. Take your sister’s part. Marry me, and then stand up for your mother.

Atal. Poor old man! Must I desert him? Ah, Dick, do not think I love you less if I don’t know how to seem ungrateful!

Dick. Let us go to him at once, and, hand in hand, tell him—the truth. Come!

Atal. I—I—dare not.

Dick. True woman! You are loath to shame the devil. Then I’ll go alone.

Atal. No, no; take me. Oh, Dick, why is he your father?

Dick. Alas! I had no voice in the matter. [Exeunt, l.]

ACT II.

Scene. A room in Dr. Minimum’s sanatorium. Sprawley discovered on a sofa.

Enter Tucker, r.

Tucker. Did you ring, sir?

Sprawl. Is Mrs. Nettletop aware that I am waiting?

Tucker. Yes, sir; I told her so.

Sprawl. Remind her, gently, will you? Thanks! (Exit Tucker.) (Reads a letter.) “Dear Beecher,—Mrs. Nettletop is all right. I have seen the will. She enjoys fourteen hundred a year in snug Consols, settled in trust on herself. So that will be secure from your creditors, present and future. On the death of her aunt, aged seventy-three, she will come into £20,000 Bank stock, and two freeholds in the Poultry.”
ACT I, SCENE I

[Stage directions and action statements are in square brackets]

Sprawl: I don't think you can do better. If the Planet Assurance office, of which I am chairman, will advance you £7,000 on the day after your marriage, can you lend me £1,500?—Your affectionate brother, Gadshill.

By Jove! these are hard terms. I'll have to pay £1,500 for £7,000. What right has Gadshill to be in a hole? It is the natural condition of a younger son like me—obliged to wear a silver watch, and go into Parliament. But Gadshill, before he was nineteen, gave his father a commercial crisis. Whereas, if I were to ask the old earl for a five-pound note, he would send for a policeman. Talk of a degenerate age! I should think so, when a fellow of four-and-twenty is obliged to marry. Oh! here is a postscript. (Reads.) “Lady Selina Raffleticket has found, among the papers of her late husband, some I.O.U.’s bearing your signature. She is after you—look out.”

Selina! Will that woman never give me up? When I was a two-year-old I made love to her, and she never forgave my coming to years of discretion.

[Enter Mrs. Nettletop, with a crochet-basket, l.]

Sprawl: So! You have come to forgive me?

Mrs. N.: Yes, if you will go away.

Sprawl: You don't mean that. (She sits.) No; I am sure you don't expect it.

Mrs. N.: Why not?

Sprawl: Because you have brought your work—and whenever a woman brings her work to an interview, she means to have it out with a fellow.

Mrs. N.: I'm afraid, Mr. Sprawley, you know too much about women to preserve any illusions about us.

Sprawl: Then, as I am the less likely to be deceived, my love is the more reliable.

Mrs. N.: Will Lady Selina Raffleticket give you a character for fidelity? You made love to her once—have you entirely forgotten her?

Sprawl: A fellow at my time of life can't be expected to remember his nurse. But I shall remember her with gratitude if she can pique your jealousy.

Mrs. N.: How can you pretend to any worthy feeling for a woman placed as I am?—a widow with a living husband—my name notorious—my reputation broken?

Sprawl: Pardon me—notoriety is no longer a blemish. There are amateurs of curious reputations, as there are of old china, to whom flaws serve to establish the character they most admire.

Mrs. N.: And such a husband would be as blind to my faults as Mr. Nettletop was to my virtue.

Sprawl: Had I been in his place, how different had been my conduct!

Mrs. N.: Are you incapable of jealousy?

Sprawl: Quite; it is so awfully vulgar.

Mrs. N.: You would not follow me about like a detective?

Sprawl: I hope I am too much of a gentleman to make myself ridiculous.

Mrs. N.: You would not exact from me an account of every hour I was absent from you? Looking into my eyes with an agony of doubt, you would not watch each word I uttered in society, and search every look I bestowed?

Sprawl: They should form no concern of mine.

Mrs. N.: And if, by chance, I should meet him again?

Sprawl: Well?

Mrs. N.: Recollect, he loves me still.

Sprawl: [End of scene.]
I should leave you in his company with the most implicit confidence.

Mrs. N. (Aside.) What a fool this man is!

Spkawl. (Aside.) I am getting on splendidly! Dearest Mrs. Nettletop—Isabella—allow me to place before you the advantages of a speedy marriage.

Enter Tucker, r.

Tucker. Beg pardon, ma’am; a gentleman desires to see you.

Sprawl. (Aside.) Check! Confound the booby!

Mrs. N. A gentleman! Have you his card?

Tucker: No, ma’am. He is a pale gentleman, in deep mourning.

Mrs. N. Who can it be? Show him into the garden.

Sprawl. (Stopping Tucker as he goes out.) (Aside.) Here, you, sir! There’s a sovereign. Say Mrs. Nettletop is engaged. Tell this mourning-coach to call in an hour.

Tucker. (Aside to him.) Oh, very good, sir. [Exit.

Sprawl. (Aside.) Now, I am secure.

Mrs. N. It is some clergyman in search of subscriptions.

Sprawl. Isabella, while you bear your present name you are subject to the persecution of remark. Change it for mine—do! My means are limited, but my expectations are undeniable. My father, the earl, can’t last much longer, and then my brother, Lord Gadshill, only stands between me and the title. He lives dooced fast, had delirium tremens in Florence two years ago; was regularly off his head, as his valet assures me; had it again last spring at Spa. Sir Jericho Maximum, our family physician, told me it was touch-and-go then.

Mrs. N. So there is nothing between me and a countess but an extra glass of brandy-and-water?

Sprawl. Which he can’t resist.

Mrs. N. The prospect is full of charm.

Sprawl. That classic brow was made for the embrace of a coronet. (Nettletop appears at window. He is very pale, and dressed in mourning. He enters.)

Mrs. N. But you were one of those admirers of whom my husband was most jealous. Will not the world point to our union as a confirmation of his worst suspicion?

Sprawl. A title covers a multitude of peccadilloes. (Taking her hand.)

(Nettletop advances.)

Dearest Isabella! Allow me to call you so.

Nettle. I beg your pardon—

Sprawl. Check! Oh! this is too bad!

Mrs. N. Mr. N-Nettletop! (Rises.)

Sprawl. The former tenant, by Jove!

Mrs. N. To what may I attribute the—the—

Sprawl. The annoyance of this intrusion?

Nettle. Before leaving this country forever, madam, I trespass on your patience to beg a few moments’ interview—purely on business—for the final settlement of some family concerns.

Sprawl. Do you wish me to withdraw?

Mrs. N. I—I don’t know—perhaps—I am so very unprepared.

Nettle. (Bowing.) Compose yourself, madam. Please observe—p-p-purely on business.

Mrs. N. (Stiffly.) I am quite composed, sir. Your presence produces as little effect on me as mine can do on you. Oblige me, Mr. Sprawley, for five minutes.
Sprawl: Very annoying! [Exit, tooling at his watch, r.]

Mrs. N. (Aside.) His indifference is badly assumed. I know he is suffering acutely. (Aloud.) Ahem! I regret to observe, sir, that you are in mourning. No family loss, I hope?

Nettle: Yes, madam; I have lately lost my w-w-wife; but that is a c-c-calamity I cannot ask you to regret. (Sits.)

Mrs. N.: You lost her, sir, as the gambler loses his fortune, to indulge a degrading passion—and, like his fortune, she will pass to other and worthier possessors.

Nettle: Of course. I knew it would c-c-come to that. She will be another’s; I could not expect her beauty to lie idle. She was intended for the mim-mim-misery of mankind, and she has her d-d-destiny to fulfill.

Mrs. N.: That is a matter in which you can take no interest, sir.

Nettle: Of course not—no—I forgot. To business.

Mrs. N.: If you please. (Aside.) What shall I do? I know I am going to cry.

Nettle: Feeling that my presence near you must be a constant source of anx-anx-anx—

Mrs. N.: —iety.

Nettle: Thank you! I have resolved to remove myself from your path forever. I leave England in a few weeks.

Mrs. N.: May I ask your destination?

Nettle: That boo-boo-b-bourne from whence no traveler returns.

Mrs. N.: What do you mean?

Nettle: (Smiling sadly.) Oh, nothing. I am under march-ing orders. I have received my route from the doctors. (Taps his breast.) I have been gone, it seems, these five years. I am a shell, ma’am—nothing more. You married a shell, full of deadly materials. The doctors have calculated the length of my f-f-f-fuse. In a few weeks—pooff!—I shall be—but I forgot; this is a matter in which you can take no interest.

Mrs. N.: (Aside.) If I trust myself to speak, I shall break down.

Nettle: I have been advised to arrange my affairs. Well, you are aware that I have no relatives, nor any ex-ex-expectation of any.

Mrs. N.: (Aside.) If I could only hum an air.

Nettle: I must dispose somehow of my fortune; so I have bequeathed it to your next husband, my only legitimate heir.

Mrs. N.: My—my next—

Nettle: (Rising.) In the fervent hope that it may tempt some heartless adventurer to marry, and make you miserable; then you will reward my memory with a warmer feeling than you ever bestowed on my person.

Mrs. N.: (Aside.) I’ve got a great, big sob in my throat, as dry as this ball of cotton.

Nettle: And now, farewell—try to forgive me. I see you still wear our wedding-ring. I never thought, when I placed it there, that we should come to this.

Mrs. N.: Take it from me, sir—if—if you will. (Turns away her head, and holds out her hand.)

Nettle: No, keep it. (Takes her hand.) K-keep it for the sake of what we were to each other. (Kisses her hand.) We cannot forget those hours—the brief life of our infant happiness—(Kisses it again)—that is dead and gone.
Goodbye, Isabella -- goo-goo-goo-goo -- (Snatches her in his arms.)

Enter Sprawley, R.

(Nettletop suddenly lets her drop, and recoils.)

Ah! I forgot -- a few minutes ago you were in the arms of that fashionable vagabond.

Sprawl. (Looking at his watch.) Just five minutes ago, if you allude to me.

Nettle. You -- you! Yes, you, sir -- you! What right have you to count this lady's minutes?

Sprawl. I leave that question to be answered by herself. Mrs. Nettletop, your business with me is concluded.

Mrs. N. I obey, sir. But I have some business with this gentleman, which I must request him to settle with me elsewhere. You understand me?

Sprawl. Perfectly. [Exit Nettletop.]

Mrs. N. Good heavens! Mr. Sprawley, what does he mean?

Sprawl. Pray, do not alarm yourself.

Mrs. N. He wants to fight you -- I know he does. A duel on my account! I forbid it.

Sprawl. Compose yourself, I entreat. I can bind him over to keep the peace.

Mrs. N. And parade my name in the police reports! Oh! Shall I never escape from this persecution? (Throws herself on a sofa.)

Sprawl. Accept me, and you shall be protected. Isabella! (Seats himself at her feet.) Seek refuge from him in my arms, love -- in my arms. Do you hear, dearest?

Re-enter Nettletop.

Nettle. Where is she?

Sprawl. In my arms.

Nettle. (Bounding.) Ah! Insatiable woman! I am waiting for you, sir.

Mrs. N. (Starting up.) This is too much. (Rings the bell.) Begone, sir. This is my accepted husband, and as such he neither can nor shall hold any communication with you.

[Exit Nettletop.]

Sprawl. Nobly done -- nobly done! You have served him rightly.

Mrs. N. But how have I served myself? Mr. Sprawley, you will not, you cannot, take advantage of a moment of exasperation to found a claim on my hasty words!

Sprawl. I shall not permit you to relapse into indecision. You are mine.

Mrs. N. Be generous!

Sprawl. I cannot afford it.

Mrs. N. Ah! What have I done? [Exit, L.]

Sprawl. Won by half a nose! What are the stakes? Fourteen hundred a year -- twenty thousand in reversion -- and a brace of fat freeholds in the city! That's the moral side of the question. Now for the physical. Can I compare this lovely young thoroughbred with that serviceable old roadster, Selina? Let me shake hands with you, Sprawley; I congratulate you -- you deserve it, old fellow. Luck at last, by Jove! Luck at last! [Exit R.]

(Enter Sir Abel, in a chair, rolled in by Doody, back.)

Doody. There you are now -- are you aisy?

Sir A. Yes. Tell Mr. Heartley that I am at his service. Where is he?

Doody. Where would he be? Himself and the young missus is collogueing together in the summer-house outside, like a pair o' turtles, as they are -- small blame to them.

Sir A. Show him in, then.
Doody: I will. (At the window.) Halloo, sir! Here, your honor! -- now's your time!

Sir A.: Is that the way you announce a gentleman, you bog-trotter?

Doody: Behave yourself, now; there's company comin'.

(Enter Dick and Atalanta.)

Sir A.: Be seated, Mr. Heartley. Why, Atalanta, you look pale and distressed. What has happened?

Atal.: I -- I have learned bad news, Sir Abel.

Sir A.: Bad news! How dares bad news intrude in my house? Let us hear it.

Dick: I regret, sir, to find that you have placed a serious obstacle to my marriage with Miss Cruiser.

Sir A.: Indeed!

Dick: The fortune you have bestowed on the woman I love takes from her the greatest charm a husband expects to find in his wife.

Sir A.: And what is that?

Dick: Dependence.

Sir A.: This is very fine, indeed; but I cannot see what you would have of me.

Dick: I would beg you to rescind your favor, and find some other recipient for your bounty.

Sir A.: The devil you would. Am I to understand, sir, that you decline my fortune? Are you so wealthy?

Dick: No, sir; I am a very poor gentleman. My only property consists of manhood and good health. But love excludes all other wants, and is so cheaply satisfied. So, sir, my estate grows the principal articles of our consumption. And for the rest, you will pardon a husband's heart if, like a mother's breast, it yearns to be the sole support of the object of its affection.

Sir A.: Heaven grant me patience! Is the fellow mad?

Dick: I regret to perceive that you do not share my sentiments.

Sir A.: Egad, sir, I hold your sentiments to be the most impudent expression to which vanity ever ascended. What! I am to disinherit my only relative, to suit your poverty! I am to unlove her -- to undo my heart-strings -- forget, how best I may -- and for what? That you may make a fool of the girl for a month, and a beggar of her for the rest of her life. And may I inquire what share I shall be permitted in her affection and in her society?

Dick: None.

Sir A.: Indeed, sir. I am, then -- the -- the obstacle. You entertain a personal dislike to me.

Dick: I confess it. I must beg to decline any obligation at your hands.

Sir A.: And, may I ask, how have I offended you?

Dick: Well, sir, I would have avoided further explanation -- for your offence is an old one.

Sir A.: And when, sir, did I ungraciously interfere with your existence?

Dick: Six-and-twenty years ago.

Sir A.: Before you were born?

Dick: Yes -- you are my father!

Sir A.: My son!

Doody: His son!

Dick: To accept the smallest obligation at your hands would be to compromise my mother's honor, to cast back a stain upon her spotless life, and to acknowledge her infamy? Could I be bribed by this girl's love, or by your fortune, to act so base a part, you might then indeed justly doubt that any of your blood beat in my heart.

Sir A.: 'Tis false!
I disown you--impostor.
Dick: Oh, sir, you mistake our positions. 'Tis I who disown you! 'Tis I who repudiate your name and connection, and cut you off from the inheritance of my affection and esteem.
Sir A.: Must I bear this, Atalanta? Why are you silent?
Atal: Because I am dumfoundered between ye. What am I to do? If I hold to him, I must seem ungrateful; if I stick to you, I must appear mercenary.
Sir A.: How dare you, sir, place a lady in such a quandary? How dare you make her ungrateful or mercenary?
Dick: 'Tis you have created the difficulty; for my claim on her affection is antecedent to yours. You are the interloper--let her decide between us.
Atal: Look, look into each other's eyes! Look! Don't you see the same intemperate devil rampant there?--the family pig-head and oppugnant jaw? Father and son!--no, you are twins; and you want me to decide between you? I won't--fight it out! [Exit.]
Sir A.: Do you see that, sir? Your first appearance in my house brought confusion and ruin with it. Is your presence always destined to make havoc in all my family concerns!
Dick: My first appearance was a misfortune I owe to you. You have seen my last. Farewell. [Exit.]
Sir A.: Am I dreaming? Doody, did you hear?
Doody: Every word.
Sir A.: He disowned me!--turned me out of his house!--cut me off with my whole fortune!
Doody: The world is coming to a pretty pass when a father is accountable to his own son for all the disgraces of his youth.
Sir A.: How dare you call me his father!
Doody: Because I believe you are, and so do you.
Sir A.: I have proofs--I tell you, proofs.
Doody: But there's a spirit in a man's heart that is above proof; and yours acknowledged him as he stood up for his dead mother, and kicked your fortune into the street, and held the door open for yourself to follow it. If I wasn't choking with pride for the honor he done ye, may I never die in sin.
Sir A.: The honor he has done me, you vagabond!
Doody: He's too good to belong to the likes of you, and that's the only thing against him.
Sir A.: Leave my house--begone--go.
Doody: No, I won't, ye poor, misguided old creature. Repent, now--repent before your other leg is in the grave.
Sir A.: Ring the bell. I'll have you kicked into the street.
Doody: There, now. Cool down--stop there until I come back--recover your senses. [He wheels Sir Abel into a corner and leaves him with his face to the wall.] Ye can shout now, and I'll tell the neighbors the fit is on ye. [Exit by the window.]
Sir A.: Help--fire--Doody--come back--help!

End of Act II.

ACT III.

Scene I. A garden.
Enter Atalanta and Mrs. Nettletop.

Mrs. N.: I am the most wretched of women!
Atal: Except me.
Mrs. N.: I have accepted a man I can never love.
Atal: And I can't have the man I want.
Mrs. N.: Lucky girl! You don't know what you have escaped.
ATAL: That’s exactly what I wish to know.

MRS. N: Preserve your independence, my dear!

ATAL: Starve myself for fear of indigestion?

MRS. N: A single girl is every man’s idol.

ATAL: Then, like an idol, she must be a thing of wood or stone—but flesh and blood is made for one man’s darling, not for every man’s worship.

MRS. N: Marry, then, if you must; and, when your illusion is dispelled, you will say as I do—why did I halve my life, and give the best of it to man?

ATAL: Why did I follow Eve’s example, when I might have had all the apple to myself? Because I could not help it! Nor can you—for even now, having snatched the fruit from poor Nettletop—you stand half angry, half sorry—eager to hold it to his mouth again. Oh, hypocrite!

MRS. N: Me—me, Atalanta? Do you deem me, then, so—so—

ATAL: Yes, my indignant Bella!—yes, you love him.

MRS. N: I—I—do—I do, to my shame! I do!—oh! what will become of me? Look, then, to what condition marriage has reduced me! And, seeing it, will you relinquish fortune, freedom of person and mind—all—to become, perhaps, what. I am? Reflect before you take this leap in the dark—reflect calmly, if you can! Weigh your fortunes evenly in your breast.

ATAL: I can’t. Nature has placed my heart all on one side.

MRS. N: Consult it, then, and may it prove a better guide to you than mine has been to me. [Exit.

ATAL: Consult my heart! Well, so I will. Come, heart, where are you, you little sneak? Hold up, and look your fortune in the face. There’s Dick, d'ye see him, eh? Aye, take a good, long look at him, for you can see all he is worth on his back. My poor little heart, he will deprive you of your liberty—you can’t do as you like then, you know; we must put down the stable—we must live in a second-floor two rooms. We shall be reduced to ride in omnibuses, to shop in Holborn, and go to market on a Saturday night in Tottenham Court Road. So much for Dick. Now look, my sweet one, look at the palace fortune holds open to us—the smiling world makesway, the floors are laid in gold, the beds are made of flowers; luxury in livery to wait upon us. Eh, what do you say? “Where is love?” My dear heart! do be a little consistent! Your old playfellow is a naked httle vagabond: we left him outside. Don’t cry, sweet; you’ll forget him. “I won’t.” You shall. “I can’t.” You must. Ah! you willful, naughty, disobedient, passionate thing, what shall I do with you?

DICK: Atalanta!

ATAL: Ah!

DICK: I have surveyed our position, dearest, and I hope you will not reproach me for what I am about to say. For your sake, I had better return to America, and restore your prospects.

ATAL: And you think, then—selfish that you are—that I would accept your sacrifice, and live on your inheritance.

DICK: Persuade yourself that it is not mine.

ATAL: And accuse your mother?

DICK: You desire, then, to share my poverty?

ATAL: I do.
Dick: You don't know what it is.
Atal: Nay! I'll teach you what it may be made, however pool it is.
Dick: Let me picture to you your future home.
Atal: Go on.
Dick: It is very small.
Atal: I'll make myself no bigger than a mouse, and consume not half so much.
Dick: One room—carpetless—cheerless—cold!
Atal: Ndt when I am in it.
Dick: A wretched table—one cup—one glass—
Atal: We'll drink after each other.
Dick: One chair—
Atal: And your knee.
Dick: Then we must eat and drink.
Atal: Ah! that is the last thing we'll think of!

[Dick and Atal continue talking]

Dick: True! But Nature must be sustained!
Atal: Impertinent Nature! Love should have no vulgar appetites, but live like a bee, on its own honey.
Dick: Temptress! Your eyes are cups, full of sweet folly. You would make me drunk, that I may not know what I do when we conspire to your perdition.
Atal: No, Dick! Be just to me. I love your father, and so do you! Yes! you would give all you possess in the world, except me, to make him feel the wrong he has done you.
Dick: That he has done my mother.
Atal: It is all the same thing!
Dick: I have nothing to forgive—nothing!
Atal: Then let me plead for her. Give me leave, and time; and if I fail, and he insists on your being an orphan, then take me, Dick, and I'll be father, mother, wife, and all to you.
Dick: Come to my heart! I am lost! Heaven forgive you for the ruin of my principles! You have prevailed over my honest resistance! [Going]
Atal: Stay! You used to wear a portrait of your mother?
Dick: Here it is! [Draws it out from his breast, breaking the ribbon.]
Atal: Give it to me. [Recovers it.] Good-by, and leave the rest to me!
Dick: May he resist you, as I have done! [Exit, r.]
Atal: Now to enter the tiger's den! [Exit, r.]

[Scene II. A room. Nettletop discovered, lying on a sofa, wrapped in his invalid's gown. Tucker in waiting.]

Nettle: (Faintly.) Tucker!
Tucker: Yes, sir.
Nettle: Have you sent for Dr. Minimum?
Tucker: He is waiting on Sir Abel, sir, but will be here immediately.
Nettle: Thank you. Have they telegraphed to London for Sir Jericho Maximum?
Tucker: Yes, sir; and also for Dr. Zkwertz.
Nettle: How very good of you! If anybody inquire for me, say I have had a-a-a—oh! Tucker—it is coming on again!
Tucker: I hope not, sir.
Nettle: Hold me! I'm going—I'm g-g-g-going! It begins in the legs—hold 'em down!
Tucker: (Holding him by the ankles.) I've got em, sir.
Nettle: Tight, Tucker—tight! I can't control 'em—when the fit is on me—(struggles violently)—ah!—oh!—ah!—here it comes! (Kicks Tucker over.) Oh J—ah'—
Oh! There -- there -- it is over -- over! Where are you, Tucker?

Tucker: (on the floor) Here! That was a powerful one, indeed!

Nettle: Overcoming -- wasn't it? I shall be better now -- you may leave me -- and if anybody inquire after me, say -- I have had a bad relapse. I sha'n't want you again.

Tucker: I am glad of that, indeed. [Exit, b.]

Nettle: (Watches him off; then rises) Isabella's heart is open to commiseration. When I spoke to her of my fatal disorder, I saw tears in her eyes! But when she hears that I have six doctors over me, she will know I am past recovery, and then she will fly to ask my forgiveness. It is true, she is not in the wrong; but, when a woman hears that a man is suffering on her account, she takes the blame, that she may enjoy the credit. (A knock) Ah! a knock! (Runs to the sofa, and resumes his recumbent posture; then faintly) Come in!

Enter Dr. Minimum, r.

Ah, Doctor Minimum, how good of you to come so promptly.

Min: No worse symptoms, I hope, sir.

Nettle: The heart, doctor, the heart.

Min: Allow me to feel your pulse. Ah! -- um! -- no fever there. How is it with the appetite?

Nettle: I live on smoke and alcohol chiefly.

Min: The absence of fever in presence of such products of irritation is a curious feature -- very curious. In what form do you exhibit alcohol?

Nettle: In the shape of brandy and soda.

Min: Ha! -- of course -- of course! Internal fever, conquered by a febrile stimulant -- similibus similia! Yours is a most interesting case, and one in which the allopathic treatment would exhibit its deficiency in a singular manner. Large doses of physic, sir, would only irritate you.

Nettle: They always did.

Min: It is the homoeopathic practice to explain to the patient the pathology of his disorder, so that he may feel an interest in his progress, and accompany his own case.

Nettle: Be introduced -- into himself, as it were; be taken in.

Min: Precisely. The seat of your complaint is in the cranium.

Nettle: (Sitting up) You astonish me.

Min: Here it lies; the anterior of the thorax in its median line. Your diagnosis portends a morbid inflammation of the pectoralis major, pleuritis muscularis. Take in a deep breath -- ah! -- so, that pains you?

Nettle: (Lies down) Not in the least. 

Min: (Disconcerted) Ah! -- um! -- a bad sign, sir, an insidious indication when Nature won't do what she ought. (Taking out a case) You have water here? So the pectoralis major is evidently in sympathy with some more important organ, which we must make to speak. We will exhibit aconite in alternation with belladonna; then we shall try pulsatilla. (Minimum prepares doses in two tumblers.)

Nettle: You could not give me a little of Isabella, could you? (Sitting up)

Min: You have no fever. We must create some. Every disease is its own antidote.

Nettle: Just as marriage is a cure for love.
MIN. Nature is full of corroborating evidence. Three drops in a pint of water--one teaspoonful every Wednesday night. You will commence with No.1. If not attended with relief, we'll try something else, and so go on changing till you are cured. The old system would have attacked your disorder with a prescription; that is sixteen homicidal drugs compounded into one conspiracy against your inside. Now we explore the mystery with one agent at a time, trying the whole pharmacopoeia without prejudice, until the patient is well; the last dose proving that we have hit on the remedy required.

NETTLE. And if he die?

MIN. I can defy our worst enemies to say we killed him.

NETTLE. Doctor, I feel better already.

MIN. That's faith, sir. Faith, sir, is the only medicine which homoeopathy permits to be taken in allopathic doses. Good-morning--good-morning.

Enter Lady Selina Raffleticket, d. at back.

SEL. What do I hear--my poor Nettletop on the sick-list. Don't go, doctor; pray don't go.

NETTLE. Ahl Lady Selina Raffleticket, how k-k-kind of you to visit a poor invalid.

SEL. You must see Sparks. I do not know what you have, but you positively shall see Sparks. My dear friend, the Duchess of Lumbago, went through the whole Medical Court Guide, visited all the wells in England, the eaux in France, and the Brunnen in Germany, drank enough water to float a man-of-war, but never got off her three wheels until she had Sparks. His electric baths set her up in two shocks--wonderful. She took them at first for a remedy, now she perseveres from pleasure. A great disappointment to her nephew, who expected the title.

MIN. Of course, madam, my patient is at liberty to call in any member of the faculty he may desire to consult with me.

SEL. Dr. Minimum--I believe. I've come down for a week or two just to see your place here. The fact is, old Lord Witherley threatened to make this place his summer asylum, and I promised Lady W. I would run down and see if your sanatorium was free from infection, because you know these sort of places are very mixed.

MIN. Your ladyship will confer--

SEL. Not a word. I'll judge for myself. I'll stop a fortnight. Oh! now I think of it, there's a poor, dear creature, the widow of a clergyman, with five small children, for whom I am getting a little assistance. Of course she is above accepting charity, but we have two parasols and a tea-tray which we are going to dispose of by a raffle. Forty subscribers, three guineas each. You will take two tickets--not a word, you dear, compassionate creature. Dispose of them to your patients, and take it off my account when I leave. {Accompanies him to the back.)

NETTLE. There, she h-has got her b-board and lodging gratis. I wonder who p paid her railway fare. [Exit Min-

SEL. So, my dear Tom, now sit up and tell me all about it.

NETTLE. Ah! shall I ever sit up again?

SEL. Don't play the fool, Tom--at least, not with me. You are too much in love to have any other disorder; so, sit up, and let me know what is your little game.

NETTLE. {Sits up.) Egad! There is no d-deceiving you.

SEL. I wish you could have said so twenty years ago.
NETTLE: Did an oasis—a spot of g-green—occur in your existence about that t-time?
SEL: Yes, my dear. I married.
NETTLE: T-true, I forgot. Who was Raffleticket?
SEL: A man about town, like myself, who squandered my little fortune—gambled every thing away.
NETTLE: Did he 1-leave you nothing?
SEL: Yes, dear, he left me a widow, after eighteen months of wedlock. He was such a handsome man—looked like a fool—but, oh, he wasn’t, as many like me can testify. Poor Raffle, perhaps he is looking down on me now!
NETTLE: L-looking up, I should say.
SEL: I forgave him every thing, for I thought he loved me. But after' his death I found among his papers the proofs of his attachment to another woman—here they are.
NETTLE: D-do you carry them about like a s-scent bottle, to relieve your feelings?
SEL: No. I brought them with me on speculation. They concern a rich, old gentleman who is down here, who ran away from his wife many years ago.
NETTLE: Do you mean Sir Abel Hotspur?
SEL: Raffleticket and Lady Hotspur were cousins. But, in consequence of some gambling scandal, Sir Abel declined to receive him in their house. Some months afterward a clandestine correspondence was discovered between the cousins, and one evening the husband surprised Raffleticket at the lady’s feet.
NETTLE: A very d-d-disagreeable moment for all three.
SEL: Sir Abel deserted his wife, believing her to be guilty, but she was as innocent as her unborn babe.
[Dick enters through the door at the back.]
NETTLE: Prove that, and your fortune is made.
BEL: Who is this?
NETTLE: The unborn babe I.
BEL: Dick Heartley 1—my old friend! How d’ye do, dear! Is it possible! Are you—you—Sir Abel’s son?
NETTLE: That’s the question in dispute. Have you seen Atalanta?
DICK: Yes; and she has prevailed over my resolution to sacrifice myself for her sake.
BEL: Your good angel sends me to aid you in your distress. By the way, talking of distress, there’s a poor, dear creature, the widow of a clergyman, with seven small children, for whom I am getting a little assistance.
DICK: If she had fourteen infants, all under the age of one year, I profess to you I have not a guinea.
BEL: No matter; take half a dozen tickets, and push them for the poor soul. There now—go on; your father objects to your marriage with his heiress?
DICK: Quite the reverse. I object to receive with my wife one shilling of his fortune. Yet, if I marry her on what I possess, may I never be a father if I have where-withal to pay for our first night’s lodging.
BEL: Poor boy! Dick, when you dispose of those tickets, keep the proceeds.
NETTLE: G-generous creature, and out of so s-s-small an income.
BEL: Your good angel has guided me to your assistance, for I alone can redeem your mother’s rame, restore your own, and bestow on you a father with an immense fortune.
DICK: You! By what means?
BEL: I possess letters written by Lady Hotspur to my husband, her reputed lover. These will carry to the mind of any sane man a conviction of her innocence. Read them.
DICK: No—she is too sacred, that I should handle her reputation, or scrutinize her honor.
Sel: Then leave the task to me.
Nettle: Oh! if you will only carry to Isabella's mind a conviction of my innocence!
Bel: Is she also obdurate?
Nettle: W-worse. She has accepted the hand of another man. This morning she proposed to Sprawley.
Bel: Sprawley—engaged to your wife! I'll set her on her guard—the man is ruined. Oh! that sheep's head of his hides a fox. And so he is after your duck! I came down here on his account. I have booked him—reserved him for a particular object.
Nettle: That's right—book him—reserve him—get rid of him. I'll pay a thousand down on his tombstone.
Sel: Done! I'll marry him.
Nettle: I'm re-revenged! P-poor devil!
Sel: Tom, don't be impertinent! Now, my dear, young friends, you will accuse me of being the softest-hearted creature in the world, when I undertake, without fee or reward, to restore to you, Tom, a stray wife, and to you, Dick, a prodigal father. But I forget poor Sprawley. Why should I ruin his prospects? He has creditors. I know one to whom he owes five thousand pounds. Isabella's fortune would make him straight.
Nettle: I'll pay his debts.
Sel: On the quiet—he could not accept anything open.
Nettle: How shall we manage it?
Sel: Give me the money, and he shall never know a word about it. And as for you, Dick!—let me see—you shall—settle a couple of thousands on that poor, dear creature, the widow of a clergyman, for whom I am getting assistance.
Dick: I'll adopt every child she has, or may have.
Sel: Then keep up your spirits, and leave your fate in my hands. I'll see Isabella at once, and wait on Sir Abel. (Going.)
Dick: Success attend you. Ehl—what's this? (Picks up a meerschaum.)
Nettle: My meerschaum.
Sel: Mounted in silver gilt! What a sweet thing it would be for my stall at the Select Orphans' Fancy Fair!—with a ticket attached, "Kindly contributed by Thomas Nettletop, Esq."
Nettle: I surrender.
Sel: (Pocketing the pipe.) A thousand thanks. The Select Orphans will remember you in their little hearts; meanwhile, keep up your own. (Exit at back.)
Dick: Throw a slipper after her for luck.
Nettle: Don't—she'd keep it.

[ACT IV. Scene I. Sir Abel's room as in Act II. Mrs. Nettletop is knocking at L. H. door, Tucker waiting.]
Mrs. N.: (calling.) Atalanta, dear—pray come to me! It is I—Isabella'. Do come! I have such dreadful news of poor Tom!
Atal: What is the matter?
Mrs. N.: He is dying. A consultation of doctors takes place this evening.
Atal: This is very sudden.
Tucker: Uncommon sudden, miss. He was took awful this afternoon!
Mrs. N.: What shall I do?—what shall I do?
It’s me, dear! I’ve done it!

Atal. Why do you not go to him, then? What are you afraid of—the sneering world? Let them cackle! Go to him! Sit by his side—nurse him till he is out of danger! Write a line to him, and say you are coming.

Mrs. N. How can I address him?

Atal. Honestly. Thus—[Writes]. There!—“I hear that you are very ill. I beg to be allowed to attend upon you. You have forfeited my love, but you will always possess my sympathy and friendship.”

Mrs. N. Oh! don’t you think that this is better? [Hands her a note.]

Atal. Oh! [Reads]. “Sir—Although you have used me so badly, and I have no right to feel distressed about you, I have no objection to forgive you as much as I ought, if you wish to see your wretched—Isabella.” Oh! what a fool I was! This is much better. There! [Gives letter to Tucker.] Give that to Mr. Nettletop.

Tucker. Shall I bring an answer, miss?

Atal. No; the lady will call for one. [Exit Tucker, r. How she loves him! I wonder if I appear to others as big a fool as she seems to me!

Mrs. N. Impossible! How could I visit him?

Atal. [Aside.] She has made up her mind to it. [Aloud.] You must, my dear.

Mrs. N. You think so? How very good of you! But I shall be on my guard, lest my real intentions be misconstrued.

Atal. There is no mistaking them!

Mrs. N. After what has occurred—

Atal. You are Tom-proof!

Mrs. N. My pride, Atalanta, my pride protects me!

[Exit.

Enter Doody, at back.

Atal. Well, Doody, will your master see me?

Doody. Divil a know I know, miss! There he sits, mumbling to himself—chewin’ the cud of his past life—the ould sinner!—an a bitther mouthful he’s got! I darn’t spake to him!

Atal. Then don’t; but wheel him in. I’ll meet his humor.

Sir A. Well—what do you want?

Atal. [Mimicking him.] What d’ye want?—boo!—I want you to be civil—and good-tempered, and to shed that bearskin, that does not frighten me a bit.

Sir A. Well!

Atal. You have placed me in a fine predicament. How dare you make me your heiress! and delude me into being your accomplice to defraud your son?

Sir A. Atalanta!

Atal. I repeat it—your son! Your son! whom you thrust out of doors, that I may usurp his place in your house—in your heart.

Sir A. I—I have no son—let him not come near me. I will not—I dare not see him.
He is very like her.

Atal.: Like her—like his mother!

Doody.: It is yourself he is—yourself over agin.

Atal.: When you are together, the resemblance is most Striking.

Doody.: Strikin’! When ye turn from the chip to the ould block, you can see where the son was cut out of the father!

Sir A.: Like me! No—his mother looked at me out of his eyes—her voice seemed to come from--his lips. Like me!

Doody.: You’re his photograph, sir—done on a bad day.

Atal.: I grant you, his voice is not like yours—but, in picture, he is your image.

Sir A.: But his eyes are blue—deep blue. I watched ’em—mine are gray.

Doody.: Well—

Sir A.: How came he with blue eyes? His mother’s were brown, soft brown!

Doody.: And don’t gray and brown make blue?

Atal.: [Looking at the portrait.] Nay, her eyes are violet!—his brow is not like hers!

Sir A.: What have you there?

Atal.: Her portrait.

Sir A.: Ah! [Looks away.]

Atal.: What a sweet face it is!

Doody.: [Looking over.] Ah, sure it was taken afther she was an angel!

[Exit Doody, l. Atalanta exits, r.]

Sir A.: [Aside.] Ay, there she is!—so fair and false! Sweet poison of my life!—why should I blame her? She was but woman—weak—weak—weak. They are made of wax—let a man breathe warmly on the best of ’em, they’ll melt at last; and then he can mould them at his pleasure.

[Enter Lady Selina, at back centre door.]

Sel.: Sir Abel.

Sir A.: Madam.

Sel.: I enter unannounced, fearing that my name might close your doors against me.

Sir A.: Let me hear it.

Sel.: Selina Raffleticket.

Sir A.: [Starting.] His—wife!

Sel.: His widow.

Sir A.: Better still. I congratulate you.

Sel.: Stay; do not insult him now. ’Tis only the savage who defaces the dead!

Sir A.: True, madam! I ask your pardon.

Sel.: I am here to make you such reparation as I may—not to exculpate him, but to offer you these letters, written by Lady Hotspur to Raffleticket, at the time of the unhappy occurrence which caused your separation.

Sir A.: To what end?

Sel.: Their perusal may serve to restore the feelings you once entertained for her.

Sir A.: By an easy process wine is converted into vinegar; but no chemistry can re-change it back into its sweet state. Lady Hotspur loved your husband, and married me to supply her lover’s extravagance from my fortune.
ACT III

SCENE I

(Sir Abel's house. A room with a table and chairs.)

Sir A. The moneys she drew from my bankers I traced to his possession. The man I had forbidden my house crept back in secret to her feet. There I confronted them—my presence struck them speechless.

Sel. You resolved it should, for you broke my husband’s head on the spot, tore the wedding-ring from the hand of your insensible wife, and left the place. You never knew that Raffleticket had forged her name to drafts on your banker. She discovered and taxed him with the crime. She knew you would prove merciless; and, when you surprised him at her feet, he had thrown himself there to implore, not her love, but her pity and her secrecy.

Sir A. Why did she not write this version of the matter to me?

Sel. She did, and you sent back her letter unopened. Then she addressed a second; it remained unanswered.

Sir A. I never broke its seal, but threw it into the fire.

Sel. But you will read these, and they will carry conviction to your mind.

Sir A. It cannot be that for twenty-five years I have been my own dupe. Let me see ’em.

Sel. They will vindicate your wife, and bestow on you a son. Here they are! What a blessing I am! and to arrive at such a moment, too, when you were in such family difficulties. Oh! by the way, talking of difficulties, there is a poor lady, the widow of a clergyman, left utterly destitute, with eleven small children, for whom I am getting a little assistance. Now, my dear, rich creature, a few hundred pounds would be a fortune to her, and you would not feel the gift, especially at such a crisis. (Aside.) Ah! he flinches, the mean old wretch. (Aloud.) There, then, I’ll leave her case with you. (Placing the packet of letters in his hand, and goes up to the back.)

Sir A. (Aside.) This is a scheme, concocted between her and that young man! (Selina beckons off.) A plot to induce me to acknowledge him. (Dick appears at back. Lady Selina speaks to him. Sir Abel watches.)

So, these letters—forged to confirm a well-planned circumstantial tale, of which I am to be the dupe; and so I should have been, had this mercenary fool kept pay-day out of sight; and, see, yonder they are putting their heads together.

Re-enter Atalanta, l.

Come here, girl. From whence did you receive this portrait—from your lover, eh?

Atal. Yes, with the hope its sight might work upon your heart.

Sir A. So, so—it is plain.

Enter Doody, l, upper door.

Sel. (Advancing with Dick.) Sir Abel, see whom I bring to your arms! Dick Heartley no more. Eli? Nay, you shall be the first to salute him by his proper name.

Sir A. Let it be Trickster, then. Fools, did you think your shallow stratagem would impose on me as easily as it has entrapped this girl? Take back your forgeries. Begone with your heartless practices.

Dick. Oh, sir, what cause have I given you to face me with such words?
ACT III

Scene I

(Sir A. and others on stage)

Sir A: What do you maintain the mask? Away with your mummery; take hence your woe-begone grimaces. You see I -- I am not to be cozened.

Dick: I obey you, sir; for to such charges I do not deign to reply -- I leave your house.

Atal: Stay, Dick! Take me with you.

Sir A: Atalanta, do you desert me?

Atal: You leave me no alternative; you leave me no other way to repay your past kindness than by atoning for your wrongs to him with all my heart.

Sir A: Begone, then -- both of ye! No words -- no hypocrisy -- out. Never let me see your false faces again. Out -- out -- so. (Exeunt Atalanta and Dick at back.) Now, madam -- now I'm for you! What is the next hocus in your box of tricks? Come, do not be disheartened at one failure.

Sel: Why do they not put him in a lunatic asylum? (Exit at back.)

Sir A: Ay, ay, if he resists robbery, knock him o' the head! That woman has the burglar's programme at her finger's ends -- ha! ha! ha! They're gone -- baffled -- broken -- ha! ha! My house is clear of 'em, and I am alone -- he! he! he! -- alone. (Attempts to be triumphant, and breaks into sobs.)

Doody: (Who has been seated apart, looking down, now looks up.) Well, are ye over that?

Sir A: Ah, you have not deserted me as she has done.

Doody: No -- more fool me! You are a bad habit I've got into! Like tobaccy -- when a man gets over the worst of ye, he can't give you up entirely.

Sir A: Don't leave me, Doody. I can't bear to be alone by myself!

Doody: Small blame t'ye. I know what company you are. (The scene is closed.)

Scene II

(The garden as before)

(Sprawley and Tucker enter, R.)

Sprawl: Is Mr. Nettletop so very ill?

Tucker: He's got four doctors on him, sir. There's Sir Jericho Maximum, just arrived from London; and there's the celebrated water-cure German gentleman, come from Malvern by telegraph, sir -- Dr. Aquarius Zkwertz; and Mr. Sparks, the electropath, sir, has brought a galvanic machine its bigas a steam-engine. Mr. Nettletop will never pull through it all.

Sprawl: By Jove! -- poor devil! -- he's booked eh? -- hasn't got a kick left in him?

Tucker: Hexcuse me, sir, he have! I would advise no friend o' mine to rely on his legs, sir! But, beg pardon, sir -- I must hurry with this letter from his lady. Poor lady! Ah! she do feel for him!

Sprawl: What lady?

Tucker: Mrs. Nettletop, sir. When the doctors have given him over, she's a-going to make it up, so as he may die respectable.

Sprawl: And she has written to him?

Tucker: I had this letter from herself, sir. (Exit, L.)

Sprawl: A reconciliation! It is indecent. I have the right to intervene here -- considering their antecedents -- an interview of this kind might degenerate into -- by Jove! it is highly improper.

(Selina enters, L.)

Sel: Lady Selina! So you have proposed to Mrs. Nettletop?
Sprawl: And have been accepted. Yes, I have made a fool of myself at last.

Sel: Don’t flatter yourself, my dear; you were born ready-made.

Sprawl: My creditors will not think so when they receive the news I have already sent them. I believe your ladyship holds some of my autographs.

Sel: There they are! Take them! No, Beecher, no! I cannot stoop to that. I’ll not receive her money! The produce of your sale of the sale, of the man I—well, never mind! I have my feelings, such as they are!

Sprawl: 'Pon my life! I did not expect this! You are a trump, Selina! By Jove, you are!

Sel: Don’t speak of me, please; that is all past now. Let us speak of yourself, my poor boy. Beware of Nettletop!

Sprawl: He is dying.

Sel: A sham, my dear—a sham to attract your intended to his side.

Sprawl: Did I not say so? If there had been anyone here I’d have bet on it. It is a plant.

Sel: A plant that will grow very fast, my poor Beecher, and overrun you.

Sprawl: Shall I tell her the trick, and put her on her guard?

Sel: She might refuse to believe your testimony against that of four doctors, and perhaps resent the imputation.

Sprawl: I’ll go to him, and say I won’t stand it. I’ll insist on his getting up. I’m awfully obliged to you for this tip—I’ll act on it.

Sel: And promptly; for he has got ahead of you in the love-chase.

Sprawl: Yes, by Jove! And he knows the country.

[Exit, l.]

Sel: Poor dear! He will come to grief in this race. Isabella will throw him over, and then I’ll pick him up. Why do I like the fool? Perhaps because he is the last man in the world I ought to take. There is in him a mixture of fool and rogue—purely Saxon, and quite irresistible.

[Exit, r.]

(Scene draws.)

Scene III. Nettletop’s room as before. Nettletop on the sofa. Sir Jericho Maximum, Minimum, Zewertz, and Sparks.

Min: With great deference, Sir Jericho, I think you mistake the diagnosis.

Sir Jer: Sir! I never mistake.

Min: This man’s sternum.

Sir Jer: Sternum!—sound as a drum!—no more affected than his boot-jack!

Min: My dear Sir Jericho, allow me to—

Sir Jer: Sir, with every allowance, I cannot find my man’s thorax affected with an inflammation; which exists, beyond all question, in his pericardium.

Min: His pericardium is as free from disorder as yours!

Sir Jer: He wants lowering.

Min: You would never get him up again.

Sir Jer: Bleed him, sir! That’s my word.

Min: We may as well murder him at once, that is my opinion.

Zkw: Dis is a most gurious gase.

Sparks: How long has he been speechless?

Min: About two hours.

Zkw: I ztake mein brovessh’nal rebbitation dat mit a gold douche in de bit of his ztommack, I make him find de use ob his tongue.

Sparks: We might try an electro-voltaic battery to the small of his back, and send a disintegrated current of electric bubbles along his vertebral column.
NETTLE: (Aside.) Oh, Lord!

SIR JER: I have no objection to try the battery, as it will settle the question.

MIN: Is the apparatus charged?

NETTLE: (Aside.) Charged! Are they going to explode me?

SPARKS: I have it ready. How many jars shall we use?

NETTLE: (Aside.) I shall be potted!

SIR JER: A moderate blast. I think, Sparks. The disease here is rheumatism of the pericardium.

ZKW: Rheumatism! Water is a putiful conductor of electricity—dere is noting for rheumatism like cold vater blankets.

MIN: Clearly. We cure a cold by making the patient sleep in damp sheets.

SIR JER: (Takes up a decanter.) What is this? (Tastes it.) Brandy! You don't mean to say that you have administered this poison?

MIN: Nature required—support.

SIR JER: Resistance, you mean, sir!—resistance!

MIN: I have relinquished the case into your hands, Sir Jericho.

SIR JER: I regret to set aside your proceedings! If the blast restores animation, let his head be shaved, and clap a blister on; apply a dozen leeches under each armpit; and I'll leave a prescription, to be taken every half hour. I must return to town by the express. Let me know by post how he gets on. I've no doubt you will see a change in the morning. Egad! I wonder the man is alive. (Going at back.)

MIN: (Following him.) I have no doubt we shall see a change in the morning. [Exeunt at back.]

ZKW: Zparks, one of doze apotecaries vos lettin' him die, and toder is goin' to kill him; ven, mit a little zimple vater, you can vash a man glean of disorder, as I shall.vash my hands.

SPARKS: No disease can withstand this battery. We blow it out, sir—we blow it out! (Going out at back.)

ZKW: Ah! Bathing is better as biowin'. [Exeunt.]

NETTLE: (Sitting up.) There is forty guineas' worth! "Lower him!" says Maximum, as if my g-grave were ready. "Up with him!" says Minimum, who wants to send me to heaven his way. "Drown him!" says Aquarius. "B-blast him!" says Pocket-lightning. Ecod! here they come again! I hope it is not the battery. (Lies down.)

Enter Tucker, l.

TUCKER: It is me, sir—Tucker, sir. Are you better?

NETTLE: Going, Tucker—going fast!

TUCKER: The lady is outside, sir.

NETTLE: Ah!

TUCKER: She is talking to the doctors—are you strong enough to see her?

NETTLE: I'll try, Tucker; show her in. I hope I don't look very ill—do I?

TUCKER: Well, sir, no—you do look wonderful well, considerin'. [Exit, l.]

NETTLE: (Rising hastily.) Wonderful well!—that won't do. Where's the powder-box?
(Powders his feet.) How is that?—too much—too pre-Raphaelite! I look more like a journeyman baker than an invalid. Let me smooth it off. There! Now to compose myself in a helpless attitude.

[Re-enter Tucker, with Mrs. Nettletop, l.]

Tucker: Softly, ma’am, if you please. Sir, here is the lady; and the doctors have ordered a nurse to sit up with you tonight—and see you take your shocks regular—and watch your blisters. She’ll be here directly—and the barber will come at eleven, sir, to shave you. I’ll see as leeches and everything is comfortable. [Exit, l.]

Nettle: Oh, dear!

Mrs. N.: Mr. Nettletop—Nettle—Tom! ’Tis I—Isabella!

Nettle: Isabella! You are very kind to come. I do not deserve it.

Mrs. N.: Is there no hope?

Nettle: I feel a little better since you are here.

Mrs. N.: Where do you suffer?

Nettle: Here!

Mrs. N.: Where?

Nettle: Give me your hand--there—in the heart, where undigested love, inflamed with remorse, lies beyond the scope of the surgeon’s skill or the physician's conjecture! But, oh! I suffer less since you are beside me; and if you could say, “I forgive you”—you may forgive me now, you know.

Mrs. N.: I do—I do.

Nettle: Isabella, dearest!—may I call you dearest?—it is only for a little time.

Mrs. N.: Yes, do—oh, yes!

Nettle: Dearest! Grateful word! It melts, it soothes, and raises me! You weep! Ah! that is the water-cure for me!—your eyes the battery from which sweet shocks of love revive me, and send a current of electric bubbles through my whole constitution! There’s physic on your lips more potent than all their pharmacopoeia put together.

Mrs. N.: Oh, Tom, you overcome my scruples—it cannot do any harm now to confess.

Nettle: Go on.

Mrs. N.: I have never ceased to love you.

Nettle: Oh! (Catches her to his heart) Ah!

Mrs. N.: Heavens! What is the matter? Your strength returns!

Nettle: No, no, it doesn’t; it was only a spasm—something shot through my peri—what-d’ye-call’-em. I’m worse than ever again. Go on; you love me—I die happy!

Mrs. N.: When I reviled you, then I loved you most. When I would not hear your name mentioned, then I cherished your image in secret; and now, when I have given myself to another, I come to say that I am yours, Tom!—yours! (Embraces him.)

Nettle: Ah!

Mrs. N.: Do I hurt you? Oh! Pardon the selfish impulse of my feelings.

Nettle: Give way to them as much as you can; it soothes me. Your impulse gives me pulse and life. Oh! Strange! What genial glow is this pervades my system? Whence comes this invigoration creeping into every limb. Ah! I feel it flows from your fingers’ ends. It is mesmeric—a sympathy—don’t take your hands away—let me live—on your life—give me—give me—(He draws down her face and kisses her) Oh!

Mrs. N.: Oh! What am I doing!
Nettle: Doing good! See, I can sit up. I do believe that I shall recover, and survive the doctors—and to think that I may owe that life to you.

Mrs. N.: Oh, Tom! how shall I face the world?

Nettle: Turn your back upon it! I don’t want you to face anyone but me.

Enter Tucker, l.

Tucker: Beg pardon, ma’am, but the apparatus is ready, and there’s Mr. Sprawley below do insist on seeing Mr. Nettletop.

Mrs. N.: Mr. Sprawley!

Tucker: Yes. He asked if you had been here, and I said no, you hadn’t—but you was expected. The nurse is waiting, and everything ready for the operation. (And as he goes out,) I’ve given the old woman a hint not to go near his legs. [Exit, l.]

Mrs. N.: Sprawley! Oh, what shall I do if he finds me here—what will the world say?

Nettle: They will say that your husband accomplished the ruin he formerly attributed to another. Isabella, we have but one alternative. Yonder door leads by the servants’ staircase to the garden—the mail-train starts in half an hour—let us elope. (He throws off his gown.)

Mrs. N.: With my own husband!

Nettle: (Putting on his coat.) I hear his foot on the stair. (He blows out the candle.)

Mrs. N.: Take me—hide me? I feel I am going to commit myself to ruin.

Nettle: (At door, r. h.) Here, let me show you the way. (A night light burns by the bedside.) (Exeunt.)

Enter Sprawley, l.

Sprawl: No one here? Is he in bed? No. What’s this—his dressing-gown and cap. He dared not face me—he has escaped before I could unmask his mummery. I’ll wait for him. She will come, and instead of him she will find me. Oh, an idea! I’ll slip on his gown and cap, and, ere she can discover the trick, I shall learn the true state of her feelings. Hark! I hear someone on this stair—a rustle of a petticoat. (Conceals himself in the bed.)

Re-enter Mrs. Nettletop, r.

Mrs. N.: I forgot my bonnet. I left it here.

Sprawl: (Looking out.) ’Tis she! {Disappears.)

Mrs. N.: Here it is! Oh, dear! I feel very frightened; but very happy. [Exit, r.]

Enter a Nurse, who arranges the room; then Tucker, with Sparks and two assistants at back with the electro-voltaic apparatus. They prepare it.

Sprawl: The devil! It is not Isabella! ’Tis the servant, and Tucker. I must not be discovered here. I’ll pretend to be asleep, with my face to the wall. {Disappears.)

Tucker: (In a low voice.) Be very careful on him.

Sparks: My assistants are accustomed to the effects. Now, then.

One of the assistants conducts the wire to the bedside.

Tucker: (Looking in.) He is asleep.

The assistant raises the side of the bedclothes and introduces the wire. Sparks turns the electro drum, and blue sparks flash and crackle.)

Sprawl: {Bounding in the bed.) Hoh!—hah!—murder!—help!
ACT V

Scene I. Exterior of a cottage at Putney. A cradle with an umbrella over it, and a large ticket stuck in it, labeled—"Visitors are requested not to touch the plants." Bobby, a maid of-all-work, is cleaning the door-step only as the curtain goes up.

Enter Lady Selina.

Sel. Is Mrs. Heartley at home?

Bobby. Yes, my lady. I'll go and tell her you are come, if you wouldn't mind havin' an eye to baby, my lady, while I am gone. [Exit, L]

Sel. So. (Reads letter.) "My dear Selina:—Will you and your husband come down and dine with us to-morrow? Sharp four. Dick has got a holiday, and we wish to celebrate the birth of baby's first tooth, which came through yesterday—thanks to my thimble. Poor Dick could not stand by and see the operation, but the little hero bore it like a man, as he is. Do come. Tom and Isabella will join us. Ever yours, Atalanta Heartley." Oh! here is the little hero. (Reads the label.) "Visitors are requested not to touch the plants."

Enter Atalanta, with a basket.

Atal. How d'ye do, dear? How kind of you to come so early. But where is Sprawley?

Sel. Dick caught us at breakfast this morning, and he and Beecher went into the city together—they agreed to row up the river from Chelsea.

Atal. (Calls.) Bobby, Bobby—what a treasure that girl is.

Sel. So are most servants, where the mistress shares in their work.

Bobby runs in.

Atal. Run down to the kitchen garden, and cut another lettuce, and pick a handful of parsley, there's a good girl.

Bobby. Yes ma'am. (Looking back.) I'm 'most feared to leave the soup—would you please listen, ma'am, and run if you hear it biling over? [Exit with basket, R.]

Atal. Poor Bobby! it is her first dinner-party, and she is so nervous. Now, tell me, how do you get on?

Selina. Well, dear; Sprawley found the wine business did not pay. You know he was the United Bordeaux Company Limited; but it was a great struggle, so we gave it up. It wanted so much capital for advertising; and if you have a connection—being friends, when you get their custom, you find it is not to pay. So we sold the business, and went into coals. Now he is the Nubbly Coal Company. He hit on a splendid idea, my dear. He bought the biggest lump of coal he could find; it was the size of a band-box. He employed two men to carry it, swinging to a pole, up and down the Strand, with a label—19s.6d. Didn't you see it in the newspapers?

Atal. No.

Sel. Oh! the police took the men off to Bow Street for stopping the traffic. Sprawley appeared, and when the magistrate said such a lump of coal couldn't be tolerated, Sprawley vowed it was the smallest he had got. The report made a column in the newspaper—such an advertisement, and nothing to pay for it. The next day we could not answer all the orders that rolled in. But has Dick received his increase yet?

Atal.
Last week, at a meeting of his directors, they raised his salary to £400 a year.

Bobby returns with basket and vegetables.

Can I help you, Bobby?

Bobby: No, missus, please; I’d liefer to do it all myself. [Exit into house, L.

Enter Dick, r. He is dressed in rowing attire, his coat over his arm.

Dick: There. I raced Sprawley from the landing for a shilling. Ah! how d’ye do, Lady Selina? (Kisses Atalanta.) Ah! how good that is—I was so hungry. (Going to cradle.) How’s Chip?

Enter Sprawley in rowing attire, r.

Sel: My dear boy, what a state you are in; you are boiling over.

Sprawl: Yes, it is so awfully hot; and we rowed from Chelsea to Putney in such style—didn’t we, Dick?

Sel: There are drafts here; do put on your coat—to oblige me.

Sprawl: I can’t.

Sel: Ah! if I were ten years younger, I would make you obey me.

Sprawl: (Putting on his coat.) I wish you would not so constantly allude to your age; nobody else does so.

Sel: (Aside.) Perhaps that is the reason of their silence.

Dick: Come in, Sprawley, with me; I’ll lend you a dry jacket.

Sel: A whole suit, dear! I shall not be able to eat a bit, If he is in the least damp.

Dick: (Going.) How fond she is of you.

Sprawl: By Jove, she is a trump—you don’t know her.

Sel: How I do bore you, Beecher. I’m sorry I came—you would have enjoyed yourself so much more without me. I am so afraid of being in your way.

Sprawl: She is the least selfish woman in the world—isn’t she? (Exit, with Dick, l.

Atal: How well you manage him!

Sel: Ah! my dear, a woman who has neither youth nor beauty must live by her wits. Men are vainer than we are; and, if he can’t be vain of me, I must make him vain of himself. But, tell me, have you heard from Sir Abel?

Atal: No. He lives in his splendid mansion, in Grosvenor Square. Of course, we read of his grand receptions and dinners; but his name never crosses Dick’s lips nor mine.

Sel: You have never met him?

Atal: More than once his carriage has passed me in the street; and I was so glad to see he is restored to health.

Sel: But not to happiness! Last week I met Doody in Piccadilly. He told me that the old man’s spirit is broken—that he never disputes or quarrels now, but mopes his life away. Oh, Atalanta! if you would but call upon him.

Atal: I dare not! Oh, you don’t know Dick’s temper; he would never forgive me.

Sel: Will he forgive me, then, for what I have done? I sent those letters by Doody to Sir Abel.

Atal: Has he not sent them back?

Sel: No.

Atal: That is strange! Selina, I do not wish for any share in the old man’s fortune; but I do love him, and I want to share with him my happiness.

Enter Mr. and Mrs. Nettletop, r.

Nettle: (Speaking off.) Walk the horses gently, Charles; and remember to call for us at seven.
ATAL: At seven! Why do you run away so early?

MRS. N.: Tom insists on going to the opera. He never loses a night. I had much rather stay at home sometimes.

NETTLE: When a fellow has a handsome wife, he is bound to show her off! We attend all the flower-shows and concerts. Every photographer in London has taken her portrait—full dress—dinner-dress—negligee—riding-habit—standing, sitting, lying—on horseback; she is in every shop-window, and in every attitude—her bust is in the Academy. I drive a pair of high-steppers, in the tallest mail-phseio * in the ring; and with her beside me, when I am circled with a horizon of admiration, I feel monarch of all I survey.

MRS. N.: Oh! how I envy you this little snuggery!—this cosy retirement! Tom is never satisfied unless I change my dress four times a day! And we never have a moment alone.

NETTLE: Except on those occasions, my dear.

SEL: Come, Isabella, let us go in and take off our bonnets. [Exit, l.]

MRS. N. (Aside to Atalanta): Atalanta, I am tortured by a painful suspicion. Tom deceives me—he has a secret passion for some worthless creature. This display is intended as a blind. There are hours of his time I can’t account for, when he is not at the club as he pretends to be.

ATAL: Are you sure?

MRS. N.: Certain. I have sat hours in my brougham watching the club-door. Hush! Come in, I’ll tell you more.

ATAL: Poor Isabella!

MRS. N.: Ah! my dear; don’t be too sure of your Tom. [Exit, l.]

ATAL: Mr. Nettletop, why do you give Isabella cause for jealousy?

NETTLE: Hush! She could not live without some excitement; nor I either. I go out for an hour before dinner, and return privately by the mews; while she is mewing round my club, her Tom is smoking a pipe in the harness-room. The coachman is sworn to secrecy on his weekly book. Don’t betray me if you value her happiness.

ATAL: (Following them, turns at the door.) Tom, you rogue!—is it thus you cure your wife of her passion for admiration? Oh, you villain!

NETTLE: Hush! (They go in.)

Enter Sir Abel and Doody, r.

DOODY: (Looking over the paling.) There is where they live.

SIR A.: You are sure that they are not at home?

DOODY: Never fear, sir. He is obliged to be at his office, and she goes to market at this hour. (They enter.)

SIR A.: They live here—eh? It is a nest of roses, lined with sunshine!

DOODY: It reminds me of our place in Ballynagoola.

SIR A.: Your place, you vagabond! Why, if you lodged here for a week, your moral influence alone would change the place into a pig-sty.

DOODY: Well, it’s a pleasant thing to hear ye blackguarding me once agin.

SIR A.: The loving woman’s hand has touched every object, and her heart has composed the picture.
Doody: (Over the cradle) Here's more of her composition!

Sir A.: What's that?

Doody: A musical instrument!

Sir A.: Their child! - their child!

Doody: Oh, you've made up your mind about that - have you? Well, what's that to you? You have no call to it, anyway.

Sir A.: My grandchild!

Doody: Not a ha'porth of it! You'll be making out a likeness between your ould phiz and that little cherub's. The head is the very moral of your own, for devil a hair yev got, aither of yez - and the mouth, too - for there's only one tooth between ye. Come away, now! You have had enough of this.

Sir A.: Poor little thing! Doody, wouldn't you like to see more of it?

Doody: 'Deed and I would, sir.

Sir A.: Lift it up.

Doody: No! It belongs to you. Why don't you lift it?

Sir A.: What are you afraid of?

Doody: I'm not acquainted wid the ways of it. Take it in your own arrums. I'll watch!

Sir A.: (Feeling in the cradle) Where is it? Here! I feel nothing but clothes - but no child! Oh! Here it is! Come! Oh! (Rises) Its head seemed to be dropping off backward.

(Enter Bobby, L. Doody speaks to her apart.)

I hope I've done no mischief!

Bobby: (Aside) The grandfather! (Bobby crosses to cradle and looks frightened at Sir Abel; takes up the child.)

Doody: Whisht!

(Exit Doody into the house after signing to Bobby, L.)

Sir A.: I - I have no right to touch - no claim to share their lives. (Sits, L.H.) I am an outcast, without kith or kin!

(Bobby, with her eyes fixed on Sir Abel, places the child in his lap.)

What - what's this?

(Enter Atalanta, L.)

Atal.: Sir Abel!

Sir A.: Atalanta! I - I thought - they told me you were not - here!

Atal.: But I am! Do not say you are sorry to see me! (Kneeling beside him) Oh, dear - dear Sir Abel!

Sir A.: Call me father. I may not deserve the name, but you will be the more generous.

(Enter Dick, L. He pauses as he sees the group.)

Atal.: Father!

Sir A.: I wished to see you thus alone. I come to your home, a solitary old man, broken in spirit, weary-hearted. I come to confess that my life has been one long nightmare, from which I awake too late. I come to ask you, my dear, to reconcile me with - him.

Atal.: With Dick - your son?

Sir A.: I - I dare not call him so, for he can never forgive me the wrong I have done his mother.

Atal.: Ah! You are convinced, then, he is your son?

Sir A.: I am. Those letters were no forgeries, but the testimony of my poor wife's broken heart. Do not speak of this! He will find in my will a full acknowledgment and such reparation as I now can make. Beg him, for the sake of this little one, to resume my name, and teach him to think less hardly of me than I deserve; and, perhaps, one of these days, when I am dead and gone, he also may call me -

Dick: (Leaning over him) My father!

Sir A.: Ah! (Rises)