ACT I. 

Scene i: Love Lane, near Doncaster. Nat's cottage embowered in shrubbery R. A pump L.C. Cottage R. Railings, etc. 

[Enter Jerry and Lord Woodbie] 

LUD: 

Jerry. Well, my lord, we shall be very sorry to lose you. I'm sure nobody will be sorrier than the boys in our stable. 

Wood. I've been here now much longer than I intended. I should have gone before, but I thought I might as well wait till after the reading of the will—not that it's got anything to do with me—but the Squire was always a decent sort, and I am rather curious to know how he has left his money. 

Jerry. The reading of the will has been fixed for three o'clock; notices have been sent to several of the principal tenants on the estate to attend. Poor Squire, I'm sorry he's dead; he might have lived till after the Derby. I know he had great hopes of one day pulling off the big race, but now he's dead and gone. Bless him, he was a right down good sort. 

Wood. Yes, I've always heard him spoken of as a steadfast friend, and where once he took a liking he was never known to change his mind. Have you seen Miss Latimer this morning? 

Jerry. No, my lord, I don't think she's come out of the grounds yet. I saw her last night with her uncle, Colonel Mulligan. 

Wood. Oh, all right. I dare say I shall see them presently. 

Jerry. I'm just going to look after the stable lads; they've got the horses out for an airing. If I should see Miss Latimer shall I tell her that you were asking after her? 

Wood. Yes—no—I mean, don't trouble; I dare say I shall see her myself. 

Jerry. No trouble, if I happen to see her I'll mention it. Good morning, my lord. 

Wood. Good morning. [Exit Jerry L.U.E.] 

Wood. Oh, Julia, Julia, you've much to answer for. Here's another night I've passed without a wink of sleep. I never knew what it was to be in love before; it's a most awful complaint and I've got it very badly. I don't know what mama will say when she knows all about it. I'm afraid she's got higher notions for me, but I know she'll give her consent when she knows how much I love her. [Laugh outside] Good gracious, what's that? [Enter Bob Buchsfyn L.U.E. smothered in blankets and speaking off] 

Bob. Yes, you may laugh, ye unfeeling monsters, you may laugh. You're a set as would laugh if you saw an omnibus run over your mother-in-law; necessity knows no law and I'm bound to do it. Here goes for another lap. [running around stage] 

Wood. Good gracious! My good fellow, what are you doing? 

Bob. Beg pardon, I didn't see you, my lord. I've just got off another three ounces. I'm bound to do it, there's no help for it. I'm making too much fat and this is the only way I can keep it down. While the stable boys have got their horses out for their exercise, I'm taking mine; I've done twelve miles this morning, had two doses of salts and senna, and three pints of boiling water. Oh, it's a splendid thing. I'll soon be as thin as the living skeleton who was being shown for a penny at the shop in High Street. 

Wood. You will kill yourself if you go on like this. 

Bob. Not a bit of it. I'm bound to do it to keep myself in condition. 

Wood. You must have a good constitution to stand it. 

Bob. Yes, my lord, my constitution has been a curse to me; everything I take turns to fat, everything I eat or drink agrees with me. It's all my constitution. If I lived on fat bacon for a fortnight, I shouldn't be able to get my clothes on or off.
Milk I ain't allowed to touch; taters, I daren't look 'em in the face; every bit of bread I eat has to be toasted to a cinder; and as for beer, oh lor, beer. [Grimaces]

Wood. Well, don't let me stop you; go on with your exercise.

Bob. Just what I was thinking. I'm getting cool here and the perspiration must be kept up. My lord, you might time me thirty times round the haystack over yonder. I'll back myself to do it in fourteen minutes.

Wood. Come on then, we'll see.

Bob. This is my form. Watch. [Runs twice round stage and exits RUE. Lord Woodbie follows laughing. If horses are used, all enter LUE with Jerry and stable lads and all exit RUE followed by Katey in riding habit. She looks round as if followed, then exits behind cottage. Music. Enter Goodge hastily L. He looks round]

Goodge. Where is she? Surely I have not mistaken the road? No, she disappeared round that corner and dived into this lane. Ha! A cottage hiding under the rose bushes. [Looks over the paling] The very nest for such a bird; I must waylay one of the servants and find out who and what she is. [Enter Nat R. with a bucket and smoking pipe] Here is one.

Nat. In '44 I won the Hoaks
And then they put me up
To ride Sir Tatton's little mare
As took the Chester Cup. [Pumps water into bucket]

Goodge. The very fellow for my purpose.

Nat. But, oh my, oh cry, it was just then d'ye see,
The pootyest gal in Doncaster, she fell in love with me.

Goodge. I say, my man.

Nat. Sir to you, sir. [S/wgj]
She said she would be mine, ven I was growed a little bigger.
She didn't know I dussn't put no meat upon my figger.
Oh my, oh cry, vot is a chap to do
Venhe's in love and got to ride,
Veil under six stun two. [Spo^72] Saddle and bridle included, mind you.

Goodge. Do you live in that cottage?

Nat. Ess. [Zr going in with bucket]

Goodge. [Holding up a sovereign] D'ye see that?

Nat. [Z?.] Ess, how much do you want for it?

Goodge. A very lovely girl rode down this lane a few minutes ago, on a bay horse with black points.

Nat. [S/zag-r] Oh, yes, she's as beautiful as a butterfly.

Goodge. Confound the fellow, he's as bad as a barrel organ! Does she live in that cottage, and can you tell me all about her?

Nat. Ess, her name is Katey Rideout, and she do live yonder.

Goodge. Alone?

Nat. Nay, but wi' her auld grandfather.

Goodge. What's his name?

Nat. He be called Nathaniel Gosling, but more often old Nat, hereabouts.

Goodge. Then he is grandfather to an angel.

Nat. Yes, a thoroughbred 'un, and sich a temper, she's as sweet as milk, as fine as silk, and as soft as a dooey morning.

Goodge. Poetical. [Hands him money]

Nat. And all included in the sovrin. [Pockets it]

Goodge. Does old squeezebags keep a sharp eye on the girl?

Nat. Lord love ye, I can get over him.

Goodge. Egad! then I have hit on the right man to do my business for me.

Nat. You may bet your last shirt button on it.

Goodge. I'll pay you handsomely if I win the girl.

Nat. I alius takes my tip for sporting information. [Takes up the bucket]

Goodge. Then tell her that I am Captain Goodge, Grindley Goodge, of Nobbley Hall.
[Going Z?.]Stay, what is your name, my man?

Nat. Well, I be called Nathaniel Gosling, but more often old Nat here-
abouts.

Goodge. The grandfather himself! I have been done.

Nat. [Enthusiastic] Yes, you have been done brown. I’ve got the sov-
ereign, no money returned. [Exit jR.]

Goodge. And here I stood, I, Grindley Goodge, to be reckoned up and
turned into cash by a yokel like that. Can this old cub be the grandfather of
such a lovely being as that girl? [Enter Tom Meredith L.]

Tom. I beg your pardo,n, sir, for addressing you, but I saw you in the
lane and I hoped you would pardon my intrusion.

Goodge. Speak out, my man. Who are you, one of my tenants, eh?

Tom. Yes, sir, my name is Meredith, Thomas Meredith. I farm the low
meadows.

Goodge. I know nothing about the estate except that I shall come into
possession of it some day. What do you want?

Tom. I have received notice this morning, sir, to quit my place. I have
no lease. Your uncle, before he died, said I would never be dispossessed.

Goodge. Then why did he not give you a lease?

Tom. He said I should never want one while he lived nor afterwards.

Goodge. Nor afterwards?

Tom. These were his very words.

Goodge. What a pity those words were not in black and white.

Tom. There never was a scratch of a pen between us. You see, sir, my
father, Colonel Meredith, owned this estate. He was a great racing man.
Your uncle was his groom. But when my father was ruined and sold up,
your uncle stepped into Nobbley Hall and became the squire. Perhaps when
he found me his poor tenant, he remembered how good and generous my
father had been to him, for though close-fisted to all the world, he was ever
open-handed to me.

Goodge. It’s more than he ever was to me, the old screw. I’m sorry I
can’t oblige you, but I must have all my meadow land for my racing stock.

Tom. I’ll take in all your stud, sir. I trained for your uncle. There’s a
two-year old in the stable now, that never had any hand but mine over him.

Goodge. Thanks, but I have my own trainer. [Going, crosses J?.]

Tom. See, Captain Goodge, I—I can’t take no for your answer; it will
just be ruin to me to quit the low meadows. I—I am in hopes of being mar-
ried, sir. Now if you deny me I shall have no home to offer my young wife,
for every penny I have is dug into your land or spent on the house I hoped
that she would one day share with me. Don’t turn me out like a dog, sir.
Come, sir, let her add her persuasions to mine. She lives yonder.

Goodge. In that cottage? Are you then the accepted lover of that beautiful
girl?

Tom. I can’t say that she has out and out said yes, but I know that she
likes me better than anyone else.

Goodge. How are you sure of that?

Tom. I’ve often told her that if I caught any fellow fooling round her,
I’d break his neck, and she didn’t object.

Goodge. I can’t stop to see the lady; I am rather in a hurry. [Crosses L.]
Tom. But you will renew my lease, sir?

Goodge. No, I want the land. You’ve had your answer, go. [Aside] And
I want the girl, so I must clear this fellow out of the estate. [Exit L.iE.]

Tom. There he goes, the thoroughbred heartless sporting character. He’s
all there with his napless drab hat, his drab face where all the wrinkles he is
up to keep watch round his eyes; he looks clean shaved all over, and covered
in air, tight from the choker to his boots; as much as to say, I don’t think
there is anything about me you can catch hold of, and there is so little anybody would care to take.
[Enter Katey Rideout J?.]

Katey: Well, Tom, what's the matter?
Tom: I am ruined, that's all. All I have worked for is to be swept away into the pocket of yonder eelskin, and I am left homeless.
Katey: A man who loves and is loved again, however poor he may be, is never homeless. Home is not built with bricks and mortar, Tom, but with flesh and blood.
Tom: But is there such a thing as home for me? Am I loved again? Nobody can answer that but you. [Nat appears and looks over paling]
Katey: When you were in luck and I could have had you any day, I did not know my own mind, but now you are ruined, I feel jealous and exasperated.
Tom: What does that mean?
Katey: It means, Tom, that when you are turned out by the world I shall say, "Come home." [They embrace]
Tom: Ah, what a comfort that is to a fellow in his misfortune. [Nat's business with rose plant]
Nat: [C. At bacJ(] They ought to have their pictures took jest so. What a interest even for their children.
Katey: [2?-] Do you feel ruined now, Tom?
Tom: [L.] I feel reconciled to it, dear.
Katey: Well, I don't. We are as poor as mice. If you lose the farm, what are we to live on? We are not going to sponge on my old grandfather.
Tom: No, I'd never be a burden to the old man. Never! Never! Never!
Nat: Hear! Hear! Hear! [Retires behind cottage]
Katey: Then you must have that lease. 7?.]Leave the captain to me; I can move his heart.
Tom: How?
Katey: Never mind how, that is my business. [7?.]The lease you shall have. Never ask me how I obtained it. Good-bye, Tom. [At the door] Have you not forgotten something?
Tom: Ah! [Runs to kiss her, she shuts the door in his face] Bless her, what a treasure she is. [Crosses. Enter Ate]
Nat: Don't rely on her to make your fortune. A man as reckons on a woman to make his way in the world ain't no better than a child.
Tom: I tell you, Nat, I have not a hundred pounds in the world.
Nat: And I tell you, lad, I have ten thousand. Hist!
Tom: Ten thousand pounds?
Nat: Every blessed copper on 'em.
Tom: Where?
Nat: In the stables at Nobbley Hall. That 'ere capital is stowed away in the loose box No.14, in the form of the two-year colt.
Tom: Flying Scud?
Nat: Hist! I tell you, d'ye want to ruin me? Speak low. Yes, Flying Scud. For two years the Squire has been keeping that colt dark, and as month after month he grew under your training, we sor the bit of stuff coming an' cornin' out as sure and clear as the ye'rly mornin' and then we kept it darker. Last June he was entered for the Criterion Stakes and then we slipped him in for the blue ribbin at Epsom. Nobody took no notice, while I got him on at 100 to 1. I swore I'd never back anything as wore hoofs, except to lose, but I've backed him to win and he will, he will. I've been a jockey, man and boy, for fifty-nine year, and never saw his match. Slip your money on him, Tom. Pitch it. Melt down your best breeches and put your last teaspoon in the pot, for as sure as we stand here, you and me has bred and trained a Derby winner. to L.]
Tom: You take my breath away!
Nat: That's what I reckon Flying Scud will do to bigger men than you and me, when ahead of his horses he shows the field his plates.
[Whispering] Ooraw! Ooraw! Ooraw!

Tom: I’ll back him, Nat, I’ll back him.

Nat: ’Old ’ard, lad, the colt belongs to Goodge. That is, he will belong to him, for this afternoon the lawyer comes from London with the old Squire’s will, which he will read at the ’all. Then Flying Scud with all his engagements will become the property of Captain Grindley Goodge.

Tom: Well?

Nat: Well, when our beauty wins the Criterion Stakes, he’ll be at evens for the Derby before Christmas.

Tom: I won’t edge a penny, Nat, I’ll stand or fall by him. 

Nat: Then you’ll fall, lad, for then Goodge will lay against him for the Derby, and he’ll be run to lose. That’s always the game them sort play.

Tom: What can we do?

Nat: Keep dark, lad, and let me work the oracle. There’s three men, pals of hisn, now on a visit at the ’all. Mo Davis, Colonel Mulligan, and Chousir. Them three and Goodge are known as the quadruped.

Tom: The quadruped?

Nat: Ay, the four legs. And the heap of money they’ve run away with! Afore they’ve found out what’s in Flying Scud’s skin, you get your money on with all of ’em. Let ’em smell your money, they’ll make it easy for you; then we’ll let the light in upon them, and when Goodge finds he has got a flyer in his stable, a Derby crack, he’ll give you the lease or whatever you ask him, for fear you should blow the secret and spoil the odds.

Tom: But I would not betray my employer.

Nat: I know it, lad, but he don’t believe in honesty except what’s paid for ad valorum, and that’s where three sharp ’uns get licked. Leave it to me, boy. Off with you to the stable, I’ll follow you.

Tom: Success, Nat, I feel success. Oh, my bright and bonny colt, when you’ve rubbed your nose against my cheek and looked so kind at me out of your dark eyes, did you know that you were going to win for me, not the Derby, but a greater prize than ever was contended for on the English turf, Katey Rideout, the girl I love better than my life, the prettiest girl in Yorkshire? [Exit L.iE.]

Nat: There goes a square, honest, good bit of stuff. His character is as sweet as new mown hay; free from dirt, of a fine nose, and jest such as any woman or friend may thrive on. [Exit R.]

Scene 2: The garden at Nobbley Hall. Front Cloth.

Enter Goodge followed by servant.

Goodge: Has Joe gone down to the station to meet Mr. Quail with the dog-cart?

Servant: Yes, sir.

Goodge: Let lunch be ready in the library at three o’clock. Have the principal tenants been notified to attend?

Servant: Yes, sir.

Goodge: Very good. [Exit servant L.iE.] I wish to enter into possession in style. Today will make me master of Nobbley Hall, and it comes not a day too soon, for my creditors began to look cloudy. Here comes two of them. They stick to me like leeches. Ah, my very dear friends, when can I afford to kick you out! Won’t I pick my heaviest pair of boots for the festive occasion—in the meanwhile— [Enter Mo Davis and Mulligan L.iE.] Ah, Mulligan, how are you enjoying yourself? Eh, Davis?

Mo: Ve have been taking stock of the place. Beautiful, ain’t it, Mulligan?

Goodge: It’s good for the thousand I owe you, Mo, and for the seven hundred I am in your debt, eh? What do you think, my rollickers?
Mo: A thousand was it? Veil I never think of it, Grindley, s’elp me, it never crossed my mind.
Mull: Don’t mention it, old fellow.
Goodge: Well, I won’t. Have you any news from Lord Woodbie’s trainer? How are the horses we sold him?
Mo: Vulcan has broken down, and Tripod has been and justified his name, and goes on three legs. He says the stable looks like a coffin lid, it’s full of screws. You couldn’t paint von of them to look like a horse.
Goodge: Where’s the young lord now?
Mull: Playing billiards.
Mo: His Lordship is a comfortable annooity to me, and Mulligan makes a setded income out of him at billiards.
Goodge: While you and I manage his stable and advise him how to lay his money out.
Mo: Ah, he’s a young mine of wealth, as ve’ve discovered, and ve’ve all shares in him.
Goodge: And a pretty sharp lookout we’ve kept upon each other to see that we shared alike.
Mo: Oh, honor, ve couldn’t get on nohow unless we had some principle; I say, Mulligan, go and keep an eye on young Lord Woodbie.
Mull: All right, I’ll see to him. [Exit. Enter servant L.iE.]
Serv: Miss Rideout, sir, wishes to see you. She has just rode into the strawyard.
Goodge: Miss Rideout, are you sure?
Serv: Yes, sir. [Speaks apart to Goodge]
Mo: Vy, here comes Mr. Quail, the lawyer.
Goodge: I must leave you, Mo, to receive him, for the prettiest girl in Yorkshire is waiting for me yonder. [Exit with servant L.iE. Enter Quail R.iE.]
Mo: Ah, Quail, welcome to Nobbley Hall. You bring de vill, eh?
Quail: I see that Captain Goodge has taken possession already.
Mo: Vynot, ain’t he a right to it; ain’t he the heir?
Quail: You are an old and valued client, Mr. Davis. Ahem! Goodge owes you a thousand pounds.
Mo: Veil, veil, he will pay me when he fingers the old Squire’s spon-doolicks.
Quail: Don’t make too sure that he will ever touch a penny of them.
Mo: Vot, vot, I thay, no jokin’! You don’t mean to tell me the Squire has cut him off?
Quail: I have no right to say so much, but as you are an old client—
Mo: Oo, Oo, jumpin’ Moses! I’m in a hole! Oo, Oo, it’s ruin. A thousand pound! What’s to be done?
Quail: Six months ago you instructed us to sue Goodge for this debt.
Mo: No, no, you was sent on by a third party. I didn’t vant to quarrel vid him.
Quail: We obtained judgment. I issued execution yesterday. The officer is waiting at the village inn. Now the rest is your business, but take my advice. Put the screw on while Goodge is in feather. Let him borrow the money or get security now, for by tonight there may not be a feather left upon him. [Exit L.iE.]
Mo: Jumpin’ Moses! Here’s a pretty kettle of fish. There’s no trustin’ nobody. Even ven a fellow’s dead and buried, he’s down on you in his will. Poor Goodge, I pities him, s’elp me, he’s out of luck. Vat’s to be done? If I put the screw on, dere’s young Lord Woodbie vill never let him be arrested; he’ll pay it or go security. I’ll offer to jine in a bill. I’ll give the bums an ’int; I’ve not got an hour to act in. Poor Goodge! Veil, veil!
Because I care for you more than anything else in the world.
I love you. Oh, I do indeed, Julia. I never said so before, but you must know it. Don’t you, don’t you?
Julia. Hush! Yes!
Wood. Oh, Julia, if you knew how I go on about you when I am alone; I’ve laid for hours outside your door, and kissed the boots you had left there; I’ve been the most infernal idiot to go on so, but I can’t help it.
Julia. No, no, you must not love me.
Wood. I shall have seventeen thousand a year when I become of age, and when my granduncle dies I’ll be a duke. I’ll marry you at once.
Julia. I am not fit to hold the rank of your wife.
Wood. You are fit to be a queen.
Julia. What I am is best known to myself, but I will not impose on your heart.
Wood. I see what it is. You look on me as a child, to be pitied and to chide, not to be loved.
Julia. Think what you please, but believe me, what you ask is impossible.
Wood. It is all over then? You turn away from me; very well, you love someone else; I hope he loves you, ’cause then you—you won’t feel as I do now. Oh, what shall I do! What shall I do!
Julia. Cecil, forgive me. (takes his hand) Won’t you speak to me?
Wood. No! (Throws her hand away and runs off L.I.E. Enter Mulligan with billiard cue in his hand)
Mull. What is the matter?
Julia. (L.) Lord Woodbie has proposed to me.
Mull. That’s elegant.
Julia. I have refused him.
Mull. Refused, refused an earl! Refused seventeen thousand a year?
Julia. The boy does not know I am an adventuress.
Mull. A what? You, my sister’s child, wid the blood of the Mulligan in you, an adventuress? Show me the man who will say it to my face.
Julia. No, but I will show you fifty that will say it every day behind your back. They say that I have been employed by you and your companions to dazzle and blind such victims as that young lord, while you pick their pockets.
Mull. Are you mad or dreaming?
Julia. No, I am wide awake; I wish I had been so three years ago when I left school to partake of your home and to become what I am, your accomplice.
Mull. Is this the gratitude for the education I’ve wasted on you?
Julia. Marry me to a rich man; take your price, pay yourself; I am ready to be sold, but let it be to one I am not expected to love.
Mull. Do my senses deceive me? Do you mean to tell me that you love this slip of a boy?
Julia. Yes, I do, and that is why I have refused him; (goes L.) I cannot cheat him in love as you do in play; I will not enter his family like a thief. (Exit R.I.E.)
Mull. Once in, who cares how you get there? Refuse seventeen thousand pounds a year! There’s no counting on a woman. When you’ve won the game for her, she’ll revoke and play the devil wid your finest combination. (Exit L.I.E.)
Scene 3: The Stable. Door R. in F. Door L. in F. with No. 14 painted on it. Hayloft R. with ladder up to it. Stable boys take two horses out through D.F. for airing. Jerry and stable helps discovered.
Jerry. Bob not yet in? He’s been out for some exercise, he wants a lot of flesh taken off him; in fact he wants regularly pulling through a sieve.
Bob. (Outside) Hallo, Jerry!
Jerry. Ah, here he is.
[Enter Bob, dressed up in wraps and looking very fat]

Bob: Give us a peel, lads.

Jerry: Take 'em off very cautiously; don't let the wind come on him too suddenly. [Business] My eyes, ain't he drawed fine?

Bob: I've had an eight-mile bust, I was twenty-nine ounces over weight this morning, let's see if I've left them on the road. [Jumps into scale]

Jerry: [Counting in weights] Nine fourteen and a half and three pounds. Nine stun ten.

Bob: That vos my mornin's averdoopise. Take out a pound. Ooraw! I'm flying still; take out another. Ah, I'm cornin' to that. Eight stun eight and a pinch of snuff. [Jumps out] There's a waste. Now I'll take a feed; wot's the bill of fare?

Jerry: Here you are. [Points to a paper on the wall]

Bob: Cold tea, sop biscuit, stale toast and a mug of water. Oh, Lord! [Enter Nat D.F.R.]

Nat: Ah, my little pips, here we are, eh?

All: It's Nat! it's Nat!

Jerry: Blow'd if it ain't "Old Boots" hisself.

All: Ooray!

Nat: How are ye, boys? It does my witals good to see you.

Jerry: Sit down. Why, what form he is in, boys; he is jockey all over still, ain't he? Now, Bob, go and get him a drop of beer.

Bob: All right, give us the jug.

Jerry: You will find one on the table. [Exit Bob DE.] Ah, Nat, when I look at you I always thinks of the glorious old times when it was reckoned the greatest honor a man could have, to hold the blue ribbon of the turf.

Nat: Ah, them was days and no mistake.

Jerry: You was well thought of, and your friends ought to have been proud of you.

Nat: I believe they was. I was laid down right as a boy, lads; I'd a father as wouldn't stand no fat, and he skinned me close before I could walk. He brought me up in the weight I should go and when I was old I didn't depart from it.

Jerry: Have you saved much?

Nat: Well, I might have saved more if I hadn't spent so much, but I suppose I mustn't grumble. You see I does pretty well even now; I gets all the information from the boys in the stables, I advertises in the "Pink un," and I sells tips, straight tips too, not like some on 'em. I can truly say that I've never done anything yet that I'm ashamed of, and I can look back on the past with the knowledge that I have never wronged man, woman, or child.

Jerry: If all had been like you, Nat, the turf would stand much better than it does.

Nat: Cf course there are black legs in every calling, and the turf is no more free from them than anything else.

Jerry: I was talking to a jockey the other day, Nat, who said he could always ride better after having a glass of champagne. What's your opinion of that? [Re-enter Bob with a pewter pot of beer]

Nat: Rot, utter rot! No man ever did anything better through being under the influence of drink; and my advice to every jockey would be, never touch a drop of liquor till after the race. You've heard of the time when I rode Skyrocket for the Great Metropolitan Stakes.

Jerry: Yes, when Scaramouth won by two lengths.

Nat: Not a bit of it, Scaramouth won by two glasses of champagne.

Jerry: Two glasses of champagne? Why, how was that, Nat?

Nat: Well, I'll tell you. It wants a clear head to ride a race; there's no excitement in the world equal to it.
I hadn’t had much to eat on the morning of the race, and although it’s bad to eat too much, still it’s bad to ride on an empty stomach.I was feeling rather faint, and just when I was on my horse, my backer says, “Have a glass of champagne, Nat; it will do you good”; so I took it. It was beautiful and cool, had been standing in ice, and tasted to my parched throat like nectar. I looked longingly at the bottle and he gen-erously offered me another glass. I took it and sure enough I did feel the better for it. “I’ll win,” says I, and off I started. I headed them all the first hundred strides. I dug my spurs into my horse, and he answered to it and I felt it was a sure thing. The champagne seemed to bubble all over me, and I felt as light as a feather. We sprung up the rise like a whirlwind. The roar of the people, the swarming of the carriages, the bright colors on the grand-stand all flashed across my eyes like a dream. It was just then I felt the horse flag in his pace; my head began to swim and I seemed to lose my presence of mind as I heard the second horse close behind me. I lost my grip and control, and my blood seemed to turn to liquid fire; my brain seemed to be a blaze and my head felt like bursting. I could feel the second horse behind me, but my sight seemed to get blurred; my own horse seemed to slip out of my grasp, and I couldn’t regain my hold. It was my fault. I had given him too much to do at first, and he couldn’t keep it up. The second horse came abreast of me; I could see the jockey; we glared into each other’s eyes as we went along neck and neck, stride for stride, until we came within a hundred yards of the winning post. Then the other jockey lifted his horse, yes, fairly lifted it, past me and won by two lengths. But he didn’t, he won by two glasses of champagne. I had the best horse, but my horse hadn’t got the best rider. Then I took a sacred oath never to touch a drop of intoxicating liquor on the day of a race, and I’ve never broken my word; and I advise you chaps to always do the same.

Bob. Well, that puts me in mind of what happened to me when I rode Blue Bell in the Ladies Plate; only I lost mine through the mare, Vixen, and not through having anything to drink.

Nat. Oh, that’s an old story, and has got about, and been told over and over again.

Bob. Well, never mind who’s been telling it, it really happened to me.

Jerry. What was it, Bob?

Nat. You’ve heard it before, Jerry, scores of times.

Jerry. Never mind, a good thing is never the worse for telling over again.

Bob. Well, I had a spell of very bad luck; hadn’t won a race for the whole season, when I got a chance with Blue Bell for the Ladies Plate. There was only two in it as far as the race was concerned, Blue Bell and Vixen—you know, the squinny-eyed mare. I rode Blue Bell, and Tommy Comfit rode Vixen. Tommy was always a bit nasty with me, and never lost a chance of queering me; and as for Vixen, we were never friendly. The betting was five to four on Blue Bell; the mare was in grand form, and I felt something inside me which seemed to say I had a sure win. When Vixen came out of the stables she seemed to look out of the side of her squinny eye in a vicious, nasty, spiteful way—something like this. [Business]

Nat. Don’t go on like that, Bob, or you will be struck with a squint.

Jerry. Well, if ever I saw a mare look like that, I should think there was sommat up.
[Scene: A conversation between Bob, Jerry, and Nat, discussing a horse race]

Bob: And so there was sommat up. Vixen had made up her mind that Blue Bell shouldn't win.

Jerry: 'Ow did she prevent it?

Bob: That's what I'm coming to. The starting bell was rang, and off we went.

Nat: Where was you, Bob?

Bob: Mounted on Blue Bell, to be sure.

Nat: Oh! I thought you said you fell off.

Bob: Now that just shows what attention you were paying to my story.

Nat: But I've heard it before.

Bob: Well, you've got to hear it again. Off we went. Blue Bell took the lead and kept it till the end of the race. Vixen kept coming slowly but surely on, till she got alongside Blue Bell, and there she stuck. Tommy Comfit was so close to me that I could smell his breath; I remember it distinctly, for he had been eating onions at the time.

Nat: P'raps she wasn't so close to you as you thought; the flavor of onions may be carried a long way.

Bob: I dug my spurs in Blue Bell's flanks, and tried to lift her forward; Tommy did the same thing with Vixen. I lashed Blue Bell; Tommy quilted Vixen, and there we kept side by side—nothing to choose between us. The other horses all fell behind, but on we went till the winning post came in sight. Then came the last grand struggle. I lashed at Blue Bell, and Tommy laid on to Vixen. The shouts on the course roared like thunder in our ears. On we went, foot to foot, muscle to muscle, head to head, neck to neck, nose to nose; and then Vixen gave such a look as never came out of a horse's eyes before, and put out her tongue and won. Won by a tongue. [Enter boy with jug of beer]

Nat: Bob, my son, what's all this here? You told me as you wos on a regiment! Oh, this won't do! This must all come off! D'ye drink beer?

Bob: A drop or so.

Nat: You look it. And you eat butter; I see it in yer. And cheese! What d'ye expect to come to with a constitootion and a career like wot you have?

Bob: I don't know what to do with myself.

Nat: Tomorrow, lad, you'll breakfast on a pint and a half of warm water, and you'll put that in it. [Gives him packet] Hepsom salts! So called 'cause they prepares the body for training. Then you'll put yourself on dry toast, stale bread, and arf a pint o' tea a day, no milk in it, mind ye. Ye mustn't look at sugar, and if you dream of beer at night, take another dose of salts in the morning.

Bob: Very good, sir.

Nat: Fifty years ago, they knew how to breed jockeys, but, love ye, I'd split a pen, and make more of a jockey than half the boys that gets the crack mounts now. And Nat Goslin', though I say it, was the pink of the Pig Skin in those days. You heard how I took the Chester Cup in 'fifty-nine? Ah! I'll tell you about that adwenter.

Song. [With chorus of hoys]

"THE OLD JOCKEY'S LAMENT"

In 'forty-four I von the Hoaks, and then they put me up
To ride Sir Tatten's little mare as took the Chester Cup.
But, oh, my! oh, cry! it vos just then d'ye see,
The pootyest gal in Doncaster, she fell in love with me.

She vos a prize gal, sech a chest, deep and full forard, and well
let down.

She said she would be mine ven I was growed a little bigger,
She didn't know I mustn't put no meat upon my figger.
Oh, my! Oh, cry! What is a chap to do, when he’s in love and got to ride veil under eight stun two. [Chorus of “Oh, my!, etc/']
I was in form to go to scale, but, Lord, so small a mite I never shall forget the day when I was coortin’ she. She undertook vith all her veight to sit upon my knee. Fourteen stun six, I thought the roof had fell in. I’ve heard that girls in general, vos made of hoop and bustle. This gal of mine, her crinoline vos made of bone and muscle. Oh, my! Oh, cry! [Chorus of “Oh, my!, etc”]
My little dear, ses she to me, I’d be afraid to take ye, For if I’d give ye half a squeeze, it’s two to one I’d break ye. Next week as I was walking my five-miler on the downs, I met her walking with a six-foot sergeant of Dragoons. [S/70^/2] He’d got his arm ’round her vaist. “My lad,” ses he, “Take my advice. Next time you want to marry, Jest handicap the gals, and see what weight you’re fit to carry.” Oh, my! Oh, cry! [Chorus of “Oh, my I, etc” After which the boys start into a jockey hornpipe, general dance, solos: Nat, Bob, and Ned]
I RIDE TO WIN (Gentleman’s Version)
The Queen of my heart is Rosie my own, A trainer’s fair daughter is she, Her dad had to win a certain great race Or ruined for life he would be. He gave me the mount; that evening I met My dear little Rosie, who cried, “If you win the race, your wife I will be.” I kissed her and boldly replied, [Chorus] Rosie, Rosie, to win I ride, Rosie, Rosie, then you’re my bride; The mare’s all right, and I’ll make her spin, For love and life, for wealth and fame, I ride to win.
The race day arrived, and there on the course, A bookie crept up to my side, And whispered, “A thousand if you will lose.” “No, never, you villain,” I cried. I saw the old man, his face full of care, With Rosie close by all the while, And then at the post, all eager to start, I shouted to her with a smile. [Chorus]
The flag quickly fell; the lot got away, But I kept the bonnie mare back; Till swift as a dart, she worked through the crowd, Got foremost of all on the track. I touched her but once with whip and with spur, Bent forward and gave her her head; We shot past the judge—hurrah! we had won. My cap proudly waving, I said. [Chorus. After song and dance, Nat exclaims]
Nat. Ah, here comes Master Tom Meredith with Flying Scud from exercise. [Enter Tom leading horse]
Tom. Soho! my beauty. There, that’ll do! He is a shaving too heavy in the shoulder, Bob. Tomorrow morning at eight, you will give him a gentle pipe opener in his breast cloth.
Bob. Yes, sir.
Tom. Put him in his box. [Business putting horse off]
Nat. Well, Tom, I don’t know what you think, but I consider the horse in first-rate form.
Tom. He’s a picture. He looks as if he knew his own secret and reveled in it. Bob, I hope you never quit him.
Bob. Quit him? I sleeps in his manger; me and the cat.
Nat. Has any of the gentlemen down from the Hall been to look at him?
Bob. They all come, and chucked an eye over him. One said he vos too slack; t’other said he’d got ’ocks like a cow, and axed me what I wallied him at, so much a pound.
Nat: I'm agoin' to make your fortin, lad, for you're gettin' overweight for your business, and should lay by a trifle, for nobody knows the day when fat will come on him, and put him into private life.
Bob: Please, sir, I've two pun ten saved up agin such an ewent.
Nat: Then I'll put every shilling of it on the Scud for you, Bob. Now be oS and take a constitutional four-miler, and get down some of that hextra.
Bob: [Downcast] I'm afraid it's bred in me, sir.
Nat: No, Bob, 'tain't bread, it's beer. [Exit Bob] Now, Tom, you're going to meet these turfited, and don't be afeared.
Tom: But how shall I begin?
Nat: Leave that to me. I'll cut out the running for you. It ain't the wally of the money only, but, oh, to see them four legs on the gridiron, and to see 'em getting it hot. Well, it will be a sight improvin' to youth, and gratifyin' to declining years. [Enter Woodbie L.D. in F.]
Wood: Here I shall be alone. I cannot see those fellows with red and swollen eyes. [Nat and Tom] Deuce take it. [Turns away]
Tom: That's one of them. [Rain and thunder]
Nat: [Aside] No, no.
Wood: It's beginning to rain. [Looks out]
Nat: He's a gentleman all over; his money wouldn't have no flavor in it. Foller me; I'll point the covey. Pardon, sir. [Exit passing Woodbie and followed by Tom L.D.]
Wood: What a fool I am. I will go back to Naseby and try to get over this feeling. [Opens and reads letter] "My darling boy: Let me entreat you to return to me, if only for a week. I hear you are wasting your youth and health sadly; and worse than all, you have formed an attachment for a worthless and designing woman, by whose arts you are retained amidst a bad set of men. I do not regret the money you have lost to these scheming persons, but I do regret that your affection should be shared between a heartless adventuress, and your attached mother, Cecillia Woodbie." This "designing adventuress" refused me; refused to be a countess because she could not love me. Hark, someone is coming here. [Looks out] 'Tis Goodge, and a lady. They are seeking shelter from the rain. I am not fit to be seen. [Wipes his eyes] I'll wait in the loft above until they are gone. [Goes up ladder R. into loft. Enter Goodge D.F.]
Goodge: [L.] It is only a shower; this place will afford you shelter. [Enter Katey D.F.]
Katey: [F.] I do not mind a ducking.
Goodge: Nor I; provided I can choose my duck.
Katey: I beg you to leave trifling, and consider my question. If you turn young Meredith out of the farm, there is not a tongue in the county that will not cry shame on you.
Goodge: I care more for one word from your lips, than for what all the tongues in the kingdom can say.
Katey: Then you will grant me a favor?
Goodge: Will you grant me that word?
Katey: You are jesting.
Goodge: No, for I love you, and I am ready to make any sacrifice for your sake.
Katey: I cannot listen to you. Let me go. [F.]
Goodge: You must; you shall. You knew that I loved you, and you came here to avail yourself of that passion to obtain a favor from me, to bestow it on my rival, young Meredith.
Katey: I came to plead to your good nature.
Goodge: You cannot ask me to mend his fortune. [Loc^s door L.] Let me rather offer you a share in mine.
Katey: Stand from before that door, if you please.
Goodge: I cannot part with you. I love you. Well, there, I offer you my hand.
Katey: Your case must indeed be desperate. [Tom ^noc^s at door D.F.]
Goodge: Nay, you shall not go. [The door R. is tried]
Katey: Thank heaven, there is someone!
Goodge: From the first hour I saw you, I marked you as mine, and mine you shall be.
Katey: If you are a gentleman, sir, you will cease this importunity. [Knocking at door] Why do they not come in?
Goodge: Because I have bolted the door.
Katey: Bolted the door?
Goodge: Hush! You must wait now till they have gone away.
Katey: Oh, why did I come here?
Tom: [Outside] Hallo, Jack! Stephen! Who has locked the door?
Katey: It is Tom’s voice. Oh, sir, what can I say? How can I explain such a position?
Goodge: You cannot, but you can pass out this way. Quick! [Opens the RR.door. She enters the stable of the Flying Scud. He lochs her in, and then opens the RE.door. Enter Tom, Chousir, Mulligan and Mo Davis 7?.] Well, gentlemen, what do you want?
Tom: [C] I beg your pardon, I did not know you were here.
Mo: [J?.] Ve have been accommodating this young gentleman vith the hods on the hanimal hinside there.
Mull: The odds to fifty pounds, Mr. Meredith.
Tom: I’ll take them again.
Mo: Done.
Tom: And again to you, sir.
Goodge: [1?.] I am sorry you should have backed Flying Scud, for it is my intention to withdraw him.
Tom: Withdraw him? Scratch Flying Scud?
Goodge: I don’t intend to run the horse, and therefore have no further need of your services. I’ll trouble you for the key of these stables.
Tom: But, sir, the horse was engaged by your late uncle.
Goodge: So were you. I discharge you both. Fetch me the keys. I’ll show you who is master here.
Mo: So, if you have dem monnies runnin’ about doin’ nothing, you may fetch dem as veil, and square up at once.
Tom: [Aside] If the Scud is scratched, I am ruined, and so is Nat. [Exit L.]
Goodge: I must get rid of these fellows and release the girl. What a state she must be in! [Enter two bailiffs L.iE.]
1st B.: Captain Goodge?
Goodge: Yes.
1st B.: We want you, if you please, sir, at the suit of Joel Lawrence.
Mo: Vot is it? Why these vagobonds is hofficers.
Mull: The devil they are! [Exit door L.]
Goodge: I am arrested.
Mo: Veil! Dis is truly ridiculous. Vere is Lord Woodbie? He will go security. [Enter Jerry door L.]
Jerry: Mr. Quail, sir, sent me to say that he is waiting in the library to read the late Squire’s will. [Exit]
Mo: Vere is Woodbie? Dis vill never do; ve must take you out between us.
Goodge: No, I’ll attend the reading in custody. In half an hour I shall have my uncle’s banking account at my mercy.
Mo: No, Goodge, old fellow, let me and Woodbie pay this, just to show you ain’t without friends as is friends. 'Hevon’t let me put the young lord in. Ain’t it selfish? [Exit DE. A pause. Katey l^noc^s at door]
Katey: [Inside] Sir! Sir, are you there? For Heaven’s sake, unlock the door.
[Enter Tom with keys RD.]

Tom: Here are the keys. Ho! nobody here? I suppose they are gone back to the house.
[Katey enters] What’s that? There is someone in there. [He tries the door] ’Tis locked. Hush! I hear sobs. It is a young woman. Ho! I understand why all the doors were locked; the captain had a girl with him, and we surprised their billing and cooing.

Katey: [Inside] Sir, sir, Captain Goodge, do. unlock the door.

Tom: That voice! It is—it is hers.

Katey: They are all gone now, and I can get away unperceived.

Tom: ’Tis she! ’Tis Katey! She was concealed here. [He buries his face in his hands] She said she had an influence over him. I see what sort it was; and I was fool enough to think she loved me.
[Enter Nat DTE]

Nat: Tom, my lad, they are waiting for us in the library.

Tom: [Aside] If he knew!

Nat: You are as white as if you were all in a lather. What’s up?

Tom: Come away, Nat, come away. We have no business here.

Nat: Why, what’s the matter?

Tom: Don’t speak to me; my heart is breaking. [Hurries him away]

CLOSEIN

Scene 4: Front exterior on the road to the Hall.
[Enter Bob L.iE.]

Bob: Well, they’re agoing to read the old Squire’s will up at the Hall, and I don’t suppose there’s much chance of him leaving me anything. People do say as how everything is a going to this Mister Grindley Goodge. He’s a cove as I never did like; a sort of a domineering, overreaching, bullying, regular bad un. He’s a regular hot un. His mother must have weaned him on pepper and mustard. Well, if he’s going to be boss, it’ll be the chuck out of all of us. If so, I think as how I shall get married and settle down. The awkward part of it is in making a selection of the proper party. My father used to say there was no depending on a woman. Oh, woman, woman, woman, woman! But there, I was alius susceptible of female loveliness.

“If to their share some trifling errors fall
Look in their faces, and you’ll forget ’em all.”
-- Shakespeare

There’s one girl as would jump at me, the parlor maid at the Cat and Sauce-pan. True, she’s got a glass eye, and a bit of a limp—something like this—but that’s rather an advantage, for if I wanted to get out of her way, she couldn’t very well run after me. And as for her glass eye, if ever I did anything wrong, and didn’t want her to see me, I could get on the blind side of her. [Exit. Enter Lady Woodbie with letter]

Lady W: This letter which I have received puts it beyond all doubt that Cecil has formed an unfortunate attachment for a reckless adventuress, who is connected with a notorious gang of unprincipled scoundrels. Whatever happens, and at whatever cost, the affair must be broken off at once. [Enter Mulligan and Mo Davis]

Mo: I tell ye, it’s true. He’s arrested and taken down to Nobbley Hall to hear the will read. Oh! Jumping Moses! If it’s true what the lawyer hinted at, we shan’t get enough to buy a return ticket to London.

Mull: Well, don’t look at the worst side of things; let’s get down to Nobbley Hall at once.

Lady W: I beg your pardon, gentlemen, did you say Nobbley Hall?

Mo: Yes, mum, ve vos just a-going there to hear the vill of the old Squire read.
LADY W.: I am a stranger here, and have missed the road on which I was directed; can you point out the way to Nobbley Hall to me?

MO.: Allow me! Just over there, and turn to the right; then you’ll come to a cross on the road, go over by the left, and take the second turning on the right, and there you are.

LADY W.: Thanks. [Exit L.]

MO.: Who is the old party? Quite an aristocratic old geezer.

MULL.: Why, don’t you remember her?

MO.: Veil, I seem to have a kind of a glimmering kind of an indistinct notion as I’ve seen her somewhere afore, and yet I can’t be quite certain where.

MULL.: Well, I’ve seen her somewhere, I’m certain.

MO.: Oh, sender me! I remember now! Don’t you remember Lord Woodbie a showin’ us some portraits the other night, and among them was one of his mother?

MULL.: His mother?

MO.: Yes, his mother! Now what’s she down here about?

MULL.: Why, can’t you see? It’s plain enough to me; she’s got scent of what we’re up to, and is going to queer our pitch with the young Lord Woodbie.

MO.: Oh, s’help me! It’s like taking the bread out of honest people’s mouths! We’re in a hole! we’re in a hole! What a blooming schermozzle. [Enter Jerry 7?.]

JERRY: Beg pardon, sir, but if you want to hear the will read, you had better come at once, as the lawyer said he’s going to start sharp to time.

MULL.: Well, come along, we might as well know the best or the-worst.

MO.: Jumping Moses! There’ll be no best about it, but all the worst.

MULL.: Perhaps the old man may have revoked before he died; but in any case, whether we’ve lost in pot over Grindley Goodge or not, we must keep a tight hand over Lord Woodbie.

MO.: Tight hand; tight hand! These frisky young fools have got a nasty way of kicking over the traces and deserting their old friends. It’s an old saying, but a true one, “Bring up a child in the way he should go, and when he’s old, he’ll do what he likes.” [Exeunt R.iE. Enter Lady Woodbie and Cecil L.iE.]

LADY W.: How strange that I should meet you, Cecil.

WOOD.: Yes, dear mother, I was on my way to Nobbley Hall, as I had been invited to attend the reading of the will, but changed my mind as I could have no interest in it, and preferred to take a meditative walk in the fields.

LADY W.: Now, Cecil, look me straight in the face.

WOOD.: [Aside] Oh, Lord! What’s coming?

LADY W.: I believe you to be still the dear, loving-hearted boy that I have doted on from childhood, and incapable of a deceitful action. Believe me, that anything I have to say is for your own good. Now answer, is there any truth in that letter?

WOOD.: [Hurriedly reading it] Who could have written it? Yes, yes, dear mother, it is true. I do love her, love her devotedly.

LADY W.: I was afraid you would say so. ’Tis a mad infatuation! You must learn to forget her.

WOOD.: Impossible! I can never forget, or cease to think of her. Believe me, mother, she’s an angel.

LADY W.: Yes, they’re all angels before marriage, and I’ve often heard it said that’s the reason husbands often wish their wives in Heaven soon afterwards.

WOOD.: If you only knew her, you wouldn’t speak like that.

LADY W.: Come now, Cecil, you are getting quite a man, but you don’t know your own mind.
You must give her up. Remember, it's only a couple of years since you thought you were in love with Sir Francis Reynold's niece.

Wood. But that was only a boyish fancy; I was not old enough to know my mind.

Lady W. And you are not old enough now to decide so serious a question. You must give up all thought of such a union. I am a woman of the world enough to tell you that more than half of the misery and unhappiness in this world is caused through ill-assorted marriages.

Wood. Mother, you are mistaken in your estimate of Julia. She is different from other women, different from any other woman I have ever met. But as I loved you in my childhood's happy days, so I love you now, and I promise you, my darling mother, that I will do nothing without your consent to my marriage with Julia. I will give her up, even if it should break my heart to do so.

Lady W. Spoken like my own true-hearted boy, Cecil. Cecil, you are still more than all the world to me, and, believe me, you shall never regret listening to the warning words prompted by a mother's love. [Exeunt L.iE.]

Scene 5: The library. Full stage, Door L, Window R. Quail at table R.C, arranging papers, Mulligan, Goodge, Mo Davis, and tenants discovered, Two policemen near door L. Enter Tom and Nat.

Quail. [C.] Take a seat, Mr. Meredith.

Goodge. [L.] Stop, sir; allow me to do the honors of my own house, if you please. [To Tom] You can stand there, my man. [Gives chair to one of the tenants]

Nat. [L.C.] No offense, sir. I say, Tom, we are the only upright men in the crowd.

Quail. [Opens the will] The will, gentlemen, I see is short and holograph.

Mo. What's that?

Nat. It's short for sweet, I hope.

Mo. But what does "holograph" mean?

Quail. Why everyone knows it means written entirely by one's own hand.

Mo. Ah! Some of my friends get writing other people's.

Quail. [Reads] "To Katherine Rideout, granddaughter of Nathaniel Gosling, I leave two hundred pounds in affectionate remembrance of the bunches of flowers she used to leave me."

Nat. Bless his heart, he didn't forget my dear Katey. Two hundred pounds in affectionate remembrance, Lord love him.

Quail. "To Dr. Dryden, who nearly caused my death by giving me enough physic to kill a whole stable of horses, I leave the--"

Nat. How much? The doctor is not here; I wonder what he'll think of his luck? Shall I go and fetch him?

Quail. Wait a minute. "I leave the empty pill-boxes and physic bottles, hoping they may never be refilled."

Nat. I shan't go and tell him; one of the others can go and let him know of his good luck.

Quail. "To Jeremiah Cobbler--"

Nat. Hallo, Jerry, it's your turn now.

Quail. "The sum of twenty-five pounds in consideration of his general good behavior."

Jerry. Twenty-five pounds? Then I'm going to have a holiday. Twenty-five pounds! I didn't expect twenty-five pence.

Quail. "To the proposed school for children of old jockeys who have never had a black mark against them, I leave the sum of five hundred pounds."

Nat. He couldn't have left it for a better purpose.

Quail. "To the hospital at Doncaster, I leave the sum of three hundred pounds."

Nat. Hear! Hear! Good again!

Goodge. [Aside] Confound his generosity! All that will come out of what should be mine.

Mull. Cheer up, Goodge, those small legacies are merely flea-bites; merely flea-bites.
[Nat.Order, gents, please!Order!]

Mull.Yes; let's have a scotch and soda.

Quail.[Sternly]Eh?

Mo.Jumping Moses! I forgot where I was.

Quail."To the members of the Jockey Club, I leave fifty pounds to be spent in a good dinner to be eaten within twelve months from the time I go up aloft."

Goodge.Or below; a mere matter of opinion.

Mo.Above or below, I don't suppose it matters much. He's got friends in both places.

Quail.Silence, gentlemen!

Mo.Yes, let's have a bit of silence, gentlemen, I am surprised at yer.

Quail."To Robert Buckskin I leave the sum of twenty-five pounds, with a strong recommendation to spend it in Anti-Fat, as I believe he is naturally stout, and inclined to make flesh, and no amount of training will keep him a reasonable size."

Nat.Well, Bob, you and Jerry share and share alike.

Bob.I'm sure I didn't expect it any more than Jerry did. Twenty-five pounds! What'll I do with it?

Mo.I'll bet you 250 to 25 that Kiddle-a-wink doesn't win the Esher Plate.

Bob.Right you are; book it a bet.

Nat.I'll stand in half with you.

Bob.Right you are.

Quail.Really, gentlemen, this is most unseemly. Silence! "To my legal advisers, Messrs. Quail and Fitter, I leave the sum of one hundred pounds each, and hereby appoint them trustees of this my last will and testament."

Nat.That's his will sure enough, but I don't see any testament.

Bob.P'raps it's one of them books on the table?

Goodge.Proceed, sir, get on with the reading of the will.

Nat.I haven't heard your name yet, Tom. For your father's sake I should have thought he would have left you a few hundreds.

Tom.I respect his memory just the same, whether he has left me a thousand farthings or a thousand pounds.

Goodge.A thousand farthings is more like the figure than anything else.

Nat.Well, I'm not so sure about that.

Quail.No more am I. Listen to this, gentlemen: "Subject to the payment of all the before-mentioned legacies, I give and bequeath everything of which I die possessed to Thomas Meredith, the son of my old master. I wish to restore the property I made out of his father, and therefore I give and bequeath to him my estate at Nobbley Hall, together with all my property of every kind therein and thereon, on the following conditions: that whereas my bay colt, Flying Scud, by Hurricane, out of Sunshine, is entered at Newmarket and Epsom, the same Thomas Meredith shall run the horse on his fair merits for these races, and shall fulfil all the engagements previously made for the said Flying Scud."

Goodge.Then what is left to me?

Quail.Nothing. [Stop music] Your name is not mentioned in the document.

Mull.He hasn't even cut you off with a shilling.

Quail.Mr. Meredith, I congratulate you, sir.

Mo. Veil, you might knock me down vith a fedder.

Nat.Ooraw! Ooraw! Three cheers, lads, for Thomas Meredith, the Colonel's son, the heir to Nobbley Hall.

All.Hurra! Hurra! Hurra!

Nat.What's the matter, Tom? The lad's stunned; he's knocked silly with his good fortune. Oh, lud! Where's my Katey? That's who he wants; my Katey, gents, that will be the lady of the manor, after all.

Tom.No, Nat. Katey and I can never be anything to each other now.
"What d’ye mean? Oh, I see; you are rich. It’s all off between ye; the girl is scratched; she won’t suit your book no more."
Tom: Captain Goodge, I must beg you to hand me over the key of Flying Scud’s stable.
Goodge: So that’s where it bites him, is it? [Goodge gives him the key after a pause]
Tom: [Handing it to Nat] There, Nat, unlock Flying Scud’s stable, and you will learn why your granddaughter can never be anything to me again. [Nat is bewildered. Tom is surrounded by Mulligan, Chousir, Mo Davis and Quail, who congratulate him]
Quail: I congratulate you, Mr. Meredith, you’re a rich man now.
Tom: [Losing self-control] Rich! I’d give every penny of my fortune if I could only think her the good and pure girl that won my heart’s first love.
Goodge: [Aside L.] Jealous, eh! Then there may be a chance for me yet. [Aloud to Tom] Cheer up, Mr. Meredith, don’t think so badly of her, perhaps she’s no worse than many another girl.
Tom: Don’t you dare to speak of her. Quit the house at once!
Goodge: [Furiously] Quit the house?
Tom: Yes, quit the house and never darken the threshold of its doors again. Remember, I am now the master here.

TABLEAU

ACT I

Scene i: The club card room. Mulligan and Mo Davis discovered.
Mull: Here, Mo, aisy wid that champagne; pass a taist of it this way. [Business. Enter Goodge C. from L.] Here’s Goodge! Well, Captain, wot’s the state of the funds?
Goodge: [L.C., drinks] Well, gentlemen, we have got tied up in an infernal tangle. Money has become tight with us for some time. The bills we have forged and paid into the bank in Lord Cecil Woodbie’s name, become due in two days after the Derby. I think our horse, Voltigeur, is sure to pull off, and if so, we are safe.
Mo: Veil, I never feel safe till we’re out of danger.
Goodge: If you could only get Julia to extract a promise of marriage from Woodbie, we should be all right in any case, because his lordship would scarcely dare to prosecute us then for forging his name.
Mull: I don’t like the whole business, and I’m afraid Julia may kick over the traces.
Mo: Quite right. You can never rely on a woman, they’re as bad as horses.
Goodge: Tom Meredith is coming here tonight, and has promised me my revenge for the large sum I lost to him the night before last. I don’t propose to begin playing cards with him till he gets half drunk, and then I fancy I shall be able to turn him inside out.
Mo: Jumping Moses! he always seems to be inclined to turn us inside out.
Goodge: Curse him, I’ll be even with him yet. He’s never forgiven me that affair with his sweetheart, Katey Rideout.
Mo: And he’s not likely to, either.
Goodge: Well, it’s a sharp game between us, and we shall see who will win. He’s flush of money lately, and if I only knew how to get a thousand or two cash tonight, I believe I could skin him out.
Mull: All the money we’ve got is out on the race, and I don’t know which way to turn for more. If Voltigeur wins the Derby, we’re all made men.
Mo: And if he loses, we shall have to make off somewhere else. All my bets are to be paid the day after the race, and if it goes against us, the day will be very useful to give me time to start off somewhere else, and set up business on the continent.
Goodge: I must get a couple of thousand ready to meet Tom Meredith at cards tonight. You, Moses, can look over his hand, give me the tip what cards he holds, and losing is an impossibility.

Mo: That’s all very well, but where are we to get the ready? I’m stoney broke.

Mull: Then what’s to be done?

Goodge: Something must be done; I cannot sit with Meredith tonight until this money is forthcoming. Have we no resource? Come, Mo, can’t you make a raise?

Mo: Two thousand pounds! You might as well ask me for the crown of England.

Goodge: That I shall win ten times this amount is sure.

Mull: It’s a moral certainty. If any respectable married man could see you slip them cards, he’d advance the amount at once. Have you no plan yourself? [To Goodge]

Goodge: I see only one hope now, Mulligan. You must invent some tale about Julia and tell it to Lord Woodbie, who has returned to London. [They all start up]

Mo: The bank is going to resume payment.

Goodge: I met him in Rotten Row. He has just arrived from Vienna. The name of Julia brings the blood to his cheek; he is more in love with her than ever.

Mull: I know it. Ever since he has been abroad, he has written to her every week. She would not answer his letters, but she would sit up at night crying over them, and console herself by scrawling replies. Then she tore them up after relieving her feelings.

Mo: Just like me venI was stone broke. I used to draw checks on the Bank of Elegance, and tear ’em up.

Mull: One day last week I found one of those letters on her desk, and, be jabers, sir, I posted it.

Goodge: He has told me that he was coming to this club tonight. That letter has recalled him, Mulligan, you have saved us. [to L.]

Mo: He deserves the Victoria Cross.

Mull: Hush, here is Julia. [Mo crosses behind table to C. Enter Julia C. from L.]

Julia: Uncle, I must say one word to you. Your pardon, gentlemen. [Bows to Goodge]

Goodge: [L.C.] We were just going into the smoke room. [Bows] Good evening. Mull. Come, Mo. [Crosses up C.]

Mo: [Aside] I say, Goodge, she looks hagitated, don’t she; out of sorts; her eyes is all staring, her features looks all ruffled up the wrong way.

Goodge: Hush! Good evening, Miss Latimer. [Exit C. and L.]

Mull: Wait for me, Mo.

Mo: I’ll smoke a cigar with you, just to show there’s no narstymosity. [Exit C.]

Julia: Lord Woodbie is in London, I have just seen him. He is following me; he did not know I saw him. I dare not trust myself to speak to him again. He must learn to forget me.

Mull: [7?.C.] What has brought him back, I wonder?

Julia: Uncle, I implore, do not ask me to receive him. Tell him I cannot, will not speak to him again. Say that my affections are engaged elsewhere. Hark! I hear his footsteps. [Crossing R.]

Mull: How do you know that?

Julia: He followed me here from the park. [Exit R. door. Enter Mo Davis from L.]

Mo: He’s come! [Crossing down R.] Lord Woodbie is here!

Mull: She won’t see him. [Enter Woodbie C. from L. Mulligan R.C.] Ah, my lord, you are right welcome. [Shades hands. Aside to Mo] Stick to me, I see a chance to get a rise for Goodge. [Aloud] Welcome, my lad, you’ve just got home in time for the Derby.
[Wood enters, followed by Mull and Mo. They greet each other.]

Wood: You look rosier than ever, Mull. How do, Davis. I hope Miss Latimer is well?

Mull: Poor Julia! She is sadly changed, eh, Davis?

Mo: Ah, you might pass her off for somebody else.

Mull: I mean in spirit. [Business. Kicks Mo]

Mo: Why did you not say so then? [Kicks Mulligan]

Mull: She lives a retired life, sees no one, especially since that unfortunate affair.

Mo: Ah, that was when she was took worse. [Aside] What work is he engineering now?

Wood: I trust that Julia—Miss Latimer has met with no—

Mull: It was a cousin, but he bore the name of Mulligan. That was enough!

Mo: She couldn't stand that. [Aside] Where is he going to?

Mull: He was the manager of the Universal Bank; he was behind hand with the accounts. Poor devil, it might happen to the best of us, but he was unlucky enough to get found out. He was in the hands of the police.

Mo: I didn't care so much for him, as I did for his young wife and family. [Aside] Where the devil is he going to?

Mull: That's what touched Julia. The poor girl was distracted about it. She never told me a word, sir, of what she was going to do.

Mo: Not a syllable. [Aside] It's a hole; he's excavating a hole.

Mull: But she packed up every ornament she had; she took the rings off her fingers, the earrings out of her ears, even the old diamond of the Mulligans that come down by female line from Mohelly Egan, the Prince of Gath-na-cush.

Mo: Every blessed Irish diamond in the family. [Aside] It's a hole.

Mull: And in the night she disappeared; pawned them, my lord, raised two thousand pounds; paid the dirty bank its claim; rescued the name of Mulligan from detection.

Mo: Two thousand pounds!

Wood: Noble girl! It was just like her.

Mo: Don't you see the blood of the Prince of Got-no-cash coming out strong in her?

Mull: She did not care for the loss of the jewels, not a bit; she never wore them.

Wood: Just what I was going to remark.

Mull: She enjoyed them in secret; she doted on the old family associations.

Mo: And besides, they weren't set fashionable.

Wood: My dear Mulligan, I hope you will not be offended, but will you—will she allow me to restore these jewels? [Takes out checkbook and goes up]

Mull: Restore! What do you mean, my lord?

Wood: [Writes at back] Let me send at once to the place where they are deposited and release them. Nay, I will take no refusal.

Mull: She will never allow it.

Wood: Then do not mention my name in the matter. Here is a check for the money. [Gives it]

Mo: Beautiful! [Crossing C takes check] I'll undertake the operation. [Goes up C.]

Mull: Give me your hand, Lord Woodbie; you have the heart of a lion.

Mo: [Aside] And the head of a goose. [Exits C. and L.]

Wood: Shall I not have the pleasure of seeing her this evening?

Mull: She's in the club. She came here with a message for me. I'll tell her that you are here; she will be astonished to hear it. [Aside] I'll have them together, and leave Master Cupid to do the rest. He's fairly caught. [Exit C. and R.]

Wood: Here is the dear little letter that brought me back. [Reads] "Dear, dear, dearest Cecil, I have been reading your dear letters, but they are sadly blotted with my tears."
Ah, why are you not beside me to kiss them away? I have learned them all by heart. I sleep with them clasped to my heart; thus only can I rest. How I love you, Cecil, how I love you! Write no more to me, but come; I am weary of this resistance; come to your own Julia.”

[Enter Julia R.D. crosses to Ah, dearest Julia—]

Julia: Pardon me, my lord, I beg you not to address me in that manner.

Wood: Why are you so cold to me?

Julia: Has not my uncle informed you that I am about to be married?

Wood: To be married?

Julia: And as my feelings, my affections, are engaged elsewhere, I—I cannot listen to your expressions of attachment.

Wood: Am I dreaming? You are in love, and not, not with me?

Julia: Ah, Lord Woodbie, why have you returned to inflict this needless pain on me and on yourself?

Wood: You ask me why I have come back? You who have learned my letters by heart?

Julia: What do you mean?

Wood: Have you been trifling with me, or do you really sleep with them clasped to your breast? Is this the cry of your heart: "--How I love you, Cecil, how I love you!--", or is this a wicked forgery? [Shows letter]

Julia: That letter! How came you by it?

Wood: It reached me in Vienna by post.

Julia: [Sinks in chair, head on table] Betrayed, betrayed!

Wood: No, no, not betrayed, but confessed. Oh, Julia, how could you love me so, and rob me of so much happiness? Do not hide your eyes from me; you said you were weary of this existence.

Julia: So I am! Be it for good or evil—I know—I know not how I have been betrayed. I have struggled honestly with my heart, but there are limits to suffering, and I have reached them. I love you, Cecil, I love you. When I sent you from me—ah, may I never repent your return.

Wood: You never shall, Julia. We are both young maybe, but when a fellow is old enough to love as I do, he is as much a man as he ever will be. [Embrace. He leads off L.iE. Enter Bob and Nat]

Nat: Bob, I want to see Mr. Meredith. [Bob stamps L. and dances] Hullo, Bob! What's a-swelling you out?

Bob: Please, sir, they've been at me, they have. Mr. Davis come an' hofferred me a tanner if I'd shut him in with Flying Scud in his box for ten minutes.

Nat: Kalkelation on Joovenile depravity! Well, Bob, you behaved like a honest boy, I hope.

Bob: Yes, sir, I took his tanner.

Nat: Eh!

Bob: And shut him in with the animal for ten minutes.

Nat: Wot!

Bob: Yes, sir, but I didn't mention that a policeman was there on dooty. Oh, sir, if you'd a seen Mo Davis' face arter he corned out.

Nat: He axed you to let him, and so you did. Good boy! Ah, them's the hactions that when you come to my age 0' life, you'll look upon with satisfaction to your innards. Go along and tell the lads at Leather head I shall be amongst them tonight at the Pigskin Club. And, Bob, how's your weight now?

Bob: Eight pounds over still, sir.

Nat: Put yourself in a double rug, and take a five-miler.

Bob: Oh, dear, I don't know where it comes from. Ain't it haggera-waitin'? I can't pass a brewery, but the very smell, I b'leeve, puts a hounce on me for hevery sniff.
[Exit up C.]
Nat: That’s a virtuous character in spite of his weight; but perfection can’t be expected in this world. [Loud laughter heard R.U.E.]
Tom: [Outside J?.] Wants to see me, eh? Well, here I am. [Enter Tom, wildly laughing]
Nat: Good evening, Master Tom.
Tom: Ah, good evening, Nat, how are you?
Nat: Pretty well, tank ye, sir, not so bad for an ould ’un. Sorry to say you’re not looking so well. London air doesn’t agree with you like the country. You don’t look half so well as when you were in the training stable at Doncaster.
Tom: And I don’t feel half so well. I daresay many envy me, but they little know what I think of myself. I was never intended for the so-called “fast life” in London. I’m getting pretty sick of it. Late hours and heavy drinking are enough to break the strongest constitution, and although I am regarded as the fortunate Tom Meredith, my money has no value for me. The smiles of lovely women make my heart ache. [Down R.C.] But what did you want to see me about, Nat, eh?
Nat: [L.C.] Well, sir, I’ve just come from Tattersall’s. Our horse, Flying Scud, is steady at 5 to 4 on him. [A little up L.C.]
Tom: And you feel sure that he will win the Derby?
Nat: There ain’t a hanimal in the list that the Scud couldn’t give seven pounds to, and a licking—Voltigeur included. What did I tell you a year ago? Ain’t he answered hevery particular?
Tom: You have doubled my fortune, Nat, and if I carry the Derby prize, I shall be a rich-man. But I’d exchange place with my own stable boy if I could believe the story Katey told me.
Nat: I don’t blame you for doubting it, and she don’t blame you neither. It did look bad, and my poor girl don’t see how she could get out of it.
Tom: Sometimes the conviction of her innocence comes over me, and then a hateful suspicion crawls back to my mind and drives me mad. [ing L.]
Nat: If Flying Scud could speak, he’d tell you what passed between her and Goodge, for he was the only human being present in the stable except theirselves. But speech is the only thing that can’t be expected of him, bless his heart. Ah, if only horses could only speak, they’d have some strange stories to tell.
Tom: I don’t mind confessing to you, Nat, that I love her still, most passionately.
Nat: D’ye think I don’t know it? What takes you out to the Tottenham Club every night till arter daylight, gamblin’? What’s druv you to drink, Tom? Why, your love for my gal. And I ses to her, “It’s a heatin’ into his constitution, and the only cure for him is just what he can’t take, and your blessed self, my dear.”
Tom: What is the use of a fortune that I can’t share with her? Wine makes me forget her for a while, and when I gamble, it is with Goodge, for I’ll ruin him, or he shall ruin me. [Exit L.iE.]
Nat: Goodge ruin you! Not while I’m on the green side of the turf he shan’t. [Exit L.iE. Enter Mo Davis with notes LD., and Mulligan C. from *•]
Mo: I’ve got the check cashed; here’s the spondoolicks. [Enter Goodge C.]
Goodge: Quick, Mo, have you got the flimsies? Here’s Meredith coming half drunk, mad for play, and ripe for plucking.
Mo: Here’s the hoof. [Business, Gag, one short, business] Ain’t he selfish? [Enter Tom, half tipsy, C., followed by Bob, waiter with brandy and water, Woodbie re-enter L.]
Tom, now Goodge, I've come to give you your revenge. Bob, some more brandy. [Waiter fills, Tom drinks, sits L. of table] Five hundred on this game. [Cuts cards]

Goodge. [Deals] Five hundred, you say. [Three cards each]

Tom. [Playing] Thousand, if you like. [Goodge wins]

Mo. [Makes a sign to Goodge behind Tom's back] Oh, I'm backing Meredith, and Goodge winning all my money. [Goodge cuts, Tom deals, plays again]

Wood. [L.C.] Is Goodge in luck? Then I'll back him for a hundred. [Puts notes on table]

Tom. I cover it. [Doer ro] Goodge wins again! [Mo, business]

Goodge. [Dealing again] Does the same bet stand? Five hundred again?

Tom. [Playing] As I said just now, a thousand, if you like.

Wood. No, no, Meredith, you don't know what you're doing. It is not fair, Goodge, to let him go on.

Tom. What do you mean, my lord; do you 'sinuate that I can't play?

All. No, no, Meredith, sit down.

Goodge. A thousand it is.

Tom. If you can't afford the stake, who asked you to bet?

Wood. I never lay a stake on, sir, that I am not prepared to pay.

Tom. Then where is your stake? I don't see it. Where is it? [Playing]

Wood. There! [Throws down notes. Goodge wins again]

Tom. That is five hundred I owe you, my lord, there it is. [Giving notes]

Wood. Thanks, I - I - don't wish to take it. I am at liberty, I presume to consider the bet off?

Tom. No, sir, I allow no man to take such a liberty with me.

Wood. Then I decline the money because I have not won it.

Mo. Not won it!

Wood. No! I saw Mo Davis making signs behind Tom's back.

Mo. Me? Oh, jumping Moses, what a haccusation.

Mull. I hope you don't mean to insinuate, my lord, that there has been unfair play?

Wood. Yes, I do!

All. What!

Goodge. Are you mad, Woodbie?

Wood. I watched you, Captain Goodge, and I saw you signal the cards.

Goodge. You lie! [Dashes cards in Woodbie's face, business; guests enter C. Glass crash, Mo business with Bob]

Tom. Stick close to me, Lord Woodbie, I'll see you through. [Tom, Bob, and Woodbie fight their way out C.]

CLOSE IN

Scene 2: Chamber in 1. Mulligan's lodgings. Enter Julia to begin, L.iE.

Julia. My uncle and his companions have not yet returned from the club. What can detain them? Lord Woodbie begs me to go with him and see his mother at once, to add my entreaties to his to gain her consent to his marrying me. How can I ever expect to make her ladyship think that I should ever be worthy of him? Oh, Cecil, Cecil, why weren't you born without a name, and without a penny? Then I could show you how much I loved you. Ah, footsteps! My uncle returned, and Captain Goodge with him. The more I see of that man, the more I dislike him. They both look upset. What can have happened? I'll listen. [Retires R. Enter Goodge and Mulligan L.iE.]

Goodge. Now, Mulligan, what's to be done?

Mull. I am at my wit's end.

Goodge. Who could have foreseen such a result? We are ruined irretrievably. [Knock L.]

Mull. There's Mo Davis with news of what happened after we left the club. Perhaps Woodbie will apologize. [Enter Mo L.iE.]
Mo: Lord Woodbie repeats his accusation. It was no use of me giving my word of honor; do all I could, nobody believed me.

Mull: [7?.] Is the word of a boy like that to be taken against the protestations of three honorable gentlemen like us?

Goodge: Yes, when there is no doubt that he is a gentleman.

Mull: Do you mean to say that we are not?

Goodge: You’re a fool!

Mull: Captain Goodge, I don’t permit you to call me a fool! As the poet says, “The man that calls me a fool—”

Goodge: Tush, man! Tomorrow morning, the magistrate at Bow Street may call you a felon. Do you suppose that Meredith is going to pay one shilling of his losses?

Mo: Oh! Oh! Then how is all the paper I’ve given to be provided for?

Goodge: When this affair gets wind, all the creditors will come down on us like vultures.

Mo: They are sure to. I shall be the first victim. Oh, why didn't I stick to the cigar and cabbage leaf line? The swindle was small, but it was sure.

Goodge: Where’s Chousir?

Mo: He’s gone to enquire what country there’s no extradition treaty with.

Mull: Do you mean to tell me, Captain Goodge, that you have placed me in the disgraceful position of being found out?

Mo: Look at me; I shall be found out for passing those bills, but I’ll swear I’m innocent party. Let us all be innocent, and leave Chousir in the hole.

Mull: That’s an idea, and Chousir’s only the son of a butcher, so he has no character to lose. Besides Julia can beg him off with Woodbie. We’ll call the forgeries a slip of the pen. [Knock]

Mo: There he is! I’ll let him in. [Exit L.iE.]

Goodge: I have no doubt you will, and let us all in if you could.

Mull: We must stand by one another, Goodge. This is a desperate business entirely. Is there no escape for us?

Goodge: None that I can see. To obtain the money now is impossible; and Woodbie, after my insult to him, will be pitiless. [Crosses and looks off R. Enter Meredith L.iE.]

Tom: I beg your pardon, but as I entered, Mr. Davis left the house. He informed me that I should find Captain Goodge here. [Goodge turns and bows J?.] I am commissioned by Lord Woodbie to deliver a message.

Goodge: To what effect?

Tom: Are you prepared to avow the foul play practised by you and your confederates, and to tender him a full apology?

Goodge: What if I decline?

Tom: In that case, I am directed to arrange a hostile meeting.

Goodge: [Crossing] Ah! Will he fight? Will he fight?

Tom: You must feel that you cannot meet one who is little more than a boy.

Goodge: Then why do you bring this message?

Tom: To ask you the favor he refused me; let me take his place. We have a long account to settle, Captain Goodge, and I am anxious to wipe off the score.

Goodge: Oh, Katey Rideout’s affair! You have taken a long time thinking it over; I thought you had forgotten all about that. Why didn’t you settle up about her before?

Tom: Because I believed her guilty, but with my knowledge of your unscrupulous character has grown the conviction of her innocence. I did not believe that a man could behave as she accused you of doing, but you have taught me of what men such as you are capable. There is nothing too mean for you to attempt; you’re a liar and a thief! a disgrace to manhood! And you ought to be expelled from every club in London, and warned off the turf.
Mull: You cannot stand that, Goodge.
Goodge: [To Mulligan] One thing at a time, sir. [To Tom] When I have disposed of this young lord, I’ll teach you what I’m capable of in another line, but I must give him a lesson before I attend to you. Here is my friend. [Crosses R.]
Mull: [7?.C.] I think you might give Mr. Meredith the preference. Fight him first, and then settle with young Woodbie.
Tom: If he faces me first, the meeting with young Woodbie will never take place.
Goodge: I know my own business best. Tonight, then, on the sands behind Calais Pier, at ten o’clock, after I have settled matters with you and your friend.
Mull: [To Meredith] Is that convaynient?
Tom: Perfectly.
Mull: [To Goodge] Pistols, I suppose? [Goodge bows]
Tom: Agreed! We shall be there.
Mull: At ten o’clock.
Tom: At ten o’clock. [Bows and exits L.iE.]
Mull: Good Heavens, Goodge, you don’t mean to fight the boy. It will be infanticide.
Goodge: I’ll kill him, Mulligan. When he proposed this duel, I saw it at once, our only chance of escape. I am a dead shot, and Woodbie shall never return to dishonor the bills we have drawn in his name, and so expose us.
Mull: I never thought of that.
Goodge: The frauds can never be traced to us without his evidence. As for Chousir, he will not betray us when he knows that he himself is out of danger. [Crosses L.]
Mull: I believe you are right.
Goodge: I must practise for an hour or so, and get my hand in. I shall start for Dover by the early train. [Exit L.iE.]
Mull: [Crossing L.] I will meet you at the station. [Enter Julia RE.]
Julia: No you won’t, uncle.
Mull: Julia!
Julia: Goodge will kill him; he is a dead shot; and Woodbie will never return to prove your villainy and expose you.
Mull: Did you hear that? Then you know what hangs over me?
Julia: I don’t care what hangs over you; let the guilty suffer, not the innocent. I will go to Lord Woodbie and tell him all I have heard.
Mull: What, that Goodge is a dead shot, and that he may escape fighting this duel by accusing his adversary of felony? Do you know what such a spirit as his would do? He would pay the money, tear up the forged bill, and meet his man.
Julia: And as you reckoned on his folly to bring him to ruin, you reckon on his honor to lead him to death; and I, I have brought him step by step to this.
Mull: What have you to do with this?
Julia: [Crossing L.] You shall see.
Mull: [Taking her wrists] You are not going to betray me?
Julia: I will not betray anyone, but, come what may, I will protect that poor boy from the consequences of his infatuation for me. [Throws Mulligan off] Go your way, f will go mine, and Heaven forgive you for what will be the result when we meet again. [Exit L.iE.]
Mull: What the devil is she going to do? [Exit L.iE.]
Scene 3: Hyde Parl^. In two.
Enter Bob with black eye and letter.
Bob: The Guvnor has given me this letter to be delivered to Lord Woodbie at once. Vot’s in it, I wonder? Something seems to whisper to me there’s summat up. I wos to be sure to give it into His Lordship’s own hands, and wos to bring back an answer.
[Going £.]
After I've done it, I'm going to square up with Goodge's lad; I'm not going to have this black eye for nothing.
[Enter Julia L.iE.]
Julia: Stop, Boy! Lord Woodbie is going to fight a duel with Captain Goodge; your master is to be Lord Woodbie's second.
Bob: I ain't so sure about that.
Julia: That letter is from your master to Lord Woodbie.
Bob: Well, yes, I was to be sure to give it to the young lord, and bring back an answer.
Julia: I am going to Lord Woodbie's. Give me the letter. [Bob hesitates] Be assured that your master, Mr. Meredith, runs no risk from Captain Goodge. I know the gentleman's designs, and I am about to defeat them. [Takes letter]
Bob: She's on a lay! When she let Goodge's name out of her mouth, her eyes snapped like lucifers.
Julia: "Dear Lord Woodbie, I have seen Captain Goodge and his friend Colonel Mulligan. Our rendezvous is Calais Sands, behind the pier, at ten o'clock. T.M."
Bob: She has opened master's letter, and read it. Beg pardon, Missee, but this here won't do, you know.
Julia: Hush! Be silent, and you will learn that I am your master's friend. If this letter reached Cecil, no power on earth would prevent him keeping his appointment. It must not be delivered until it is too late for him to reach Calais this evening.
Bob: Hexcuse me, Miss, I'm very sorry for the young Lord Woodbie, but if he don't turn up when they've pitched the ropes, my master will have to go and pull his coat off. Now if this 'ere is a plant, and there's going to be any murder cropping out of the transaction, I'd as lief my master wasn't first come, first served.
Julia: Your master shall be in no danger, I promise you, and Goodge shall find an antagonist who will inflict on him indelible disgrace. Go back and tell your master that Lord Woodbie will be there at Calais Pier tonight at ten o'clock.
Bob: Well, I believe, Miss, that you mean square, and I've no objection to serve his lordship, but I'm a-going with master this over the water business, and when I'm there, if I sees any sign of a cross, or my master getting in a hole, I'll split.
Julia: Yes, you may do that. Farewell. [Exit Bob] Ah, Cecil, Cecil, how many times have I sworn to devote my life to you! Now he shall know how Julia keeps her word. [Exit L.iE.; enter Katey and Nat J?.]
Katey: Oh, Grandfather, Tom is in some great trouble; in the park there, he clenched his hand and bit his lip. I was watching him; I was watching him. [Looking off]
Nat: Of course you was; it's a lucky as heyes ain't got tooth, or you'd eat him.
Katey: [Looking 7?.] I can see him still.
Nat: You are wuss than a cannibal; you live on that 'ere human bein'. Come, you'd best give him up.
Katey: I can't! I can't! I love him more than ever.
Nat: Of course you do, now you can't get him.
Katey: Oh, Grandfather, Grandfather! [Hides her face on Nat's breast]
Nat: Nay, I didn't mean to hurt ye. Don't cry. There. Why, to see thee married to that lad, I'd lay down in my own grave, and pull the turf over me. [Katey sobs] I would! There, deary, put up your tears; save 'em. Hush! yonder is Goodge.
KATEY: He has spoken to me already in the Row; I cannot escape from his pursuit. This conduct only confirms the scandal under which I am suffering.

NAT: And poor Tom is suffering as badly as you are.

KATEY: That’s some comfort. What did he say of me?

NAT: "Sometimes," ses he, "my heart goes in for her, and then I feel as if I could take her in my arms again."

KATEY: Oh, why can’t I pitch on one of those times.

NAT: "But arter that I gets skerry," ses he, "then I hates her, and I goes to the dogs."

KATEY: I’d go there too, with him, if he’d let me.

NAT: He is gamblin’ away his fortune.

KATEY: So much the better. When he is poor he will come nearer to me.

NAT: He is making love to every girl he meets.

KATEY: I know it, but he has not settled down to one. Oh, dear, why can’t he believe in me?

NAT: Ah, there now, if you had been a boss, I could have given a warranty.

KATEY: If I could only make him believe me, I feel I could go down on my knees to him.

NAT: Ah! Hattitudes don’t prove nothing.

KATEY: His heart must be as hard as iron, or my tears would have melted him.

NAT: Facts is waterproof, and on that ’ere occasion between you and Goodge, things didn’t look sweet. Katey, when I heard on it, and then opened that stable door, and saw you locked up there, well, it took all my faith in ye, and knowledge of your breed, to gie ye a clean bill o’ health.

KATEY: There goes Goodge, the monster; oh, how I hate him. He has broken my life, ruined my happiness forever. [She goes up a little L.]

NAT: [To Bob] Hullo, Bob, what’s up now?

BOB: Hullo, Nat. Haven’t you heard? There’s been a row.

NAT: Yes, you’ve got a notice in your peeper to that effect.

KATEY: Why, Bob, what have you been doing to your eye?

BOB: It wasn’t me, Miss, it was Captain Goodge’s lad. Him and me was at the club last night, waiting for our masters, and that’s how we came to hear of it.

NAT: What?

BOB: Why, Goodge and his party set on my master last night, and sharped him at cards, but Lord Woodbie twigged and hexposed them, when up gets all four legs at master, and sets on him.

KATEY: Oh, Tom!

BOB: "Come on," ses master to Goodge and Co., "I’ll undertake to put you through the winding-up act," and before the spectators had time to take hodds, he set all four legs hexamining the carpet.

NAT: How do you know this?

BOB: I was there, and of course when me and Goodge’s boy ’ad put up last night and littered down our horses, we had it out in our spare loose box; nine rounds comfortable and quiet, and Flying Scud a lookin’ at us over the half door, amirin’ that style of groomin’.

KATEY: Was your master hurt?

BOB: Not he, Miss. When I accounted for wearing this cockade hon my heye, he larfed, tipped me a fiver to get it painted, a sov for Goodge’s lad to square the doctor. Ah! I don’t know why he ain’t a royal dook, he have the heart of one.
Always preserve the original meaning, context, and sequence order. Correct spelling errors and OCR errors. Remove page headers and footers (including page numbers). Keep all original act and scene headings and descriptions. Do not add additional act and scene headings. Convert all em-dashes to '--'. Remove extra line breaks if a character speaks in prose, but preserve line breaks if a character speaks in verse. Separate speaker labels and their associated lines with ':'. Put all stage directions and action statements in square brackets []. Just output the normalized texts.

---

I suppose they'll settle the matter by what they call doolin', for I've got orders for the brougham to take master down to the Dover line, as it is there those ewents do come off, and I was carrying to Lord Woodbie a letter, but the young lady as the lord is sweet upon, took it. I shouldn't wonder but it is to ask him to hold the sponge.

Katey: What! My Tom going to fight a duel? They'll kill him! No, he shan't go! I'll cling to him; he may trample me under foot, but now I'll never leave him. Tom! Tom! [Business with Nat, Exit L.iE.]

Nat: You fat-headed bran mash, what did you tell her for? I've a good mind to put your other eye in mournin' for ye. [Business, and exit Nat and Bob L.iE.]

Scene 4: Calais Sands.

Enter Goodge, Moses and Mulligan R.U.E. or L.UJE.

Mull: No sign of them yet. [Looks around]

Mo: Up to now he is invisible to the naked eye.

Goodge: They cannot have mistaken the place.

Mull: I'll look in this direction. [Exit R.iE.]

Mo: And I'll look in this. Jumping Moses, what's that?

Goodge: 'Tis your own shadow.

Mo: Oh, gracious goodness, to think I should ever live to be frightened by my own shadow. This is a dangerous business, Goodge. It puts my 'art in my mouth. [Exit looking before him L.]

Goodge: After this affair, London will be too hot to hold me. I must disappear; after the Derby, I'll start for the gambling towns of Germany, and some new associates. [Re-enter Mulligan R.iE. looks off R.]

Mull: Here comes one of them at any rate. [Re-enter Mo Davis]

Mo: It isn't him; it isn't Lord Woodbie. [Enter Tom and Bob with pistol case R.]

Tom: I regret, gentlemen, that through some error, Lord Woodbie has failed to appear.

Mo: Then he will be posted as a coward through every club in London.

Goodge: I presume he knew the hour and place?

Tom: I wrote to him, and he replied that he would meet me. [To Bob] You saw his lordship?

Bob: He said as how he'd attend to it.

Mo: A pretty way to attend to it by stopping away.

Tom: By some accident he has missed the departure of the boat.

Bob: [Aside] Fm the haccident.

Mull: On such an occasion he would take a special train.

Mo: Yes, he would have boarded a special train.

Tom: He may have done so, but he could not cross the Channel if he missed the steamer.

Mull: His own yacht lies at Dover; I saw it there.

Mo: And I saw it, too. I took particular notice of the crew, two men and a dog.

Tom: Well, gentlemen, I think it probable that he has been induced to decline this meeting. I confess I used every argument to make him do so.

Goodge: On what ground, sir?

Tom: Firstly, because he is a foolish boy; and secondly, because he is not obliged to meet a blackleg, nor stand up to risk an honorable life before a professional assassin.

Goodge: Professional assassin! How dare you apply such an expression to me!

Tom: Because it best expresses the man who would attempt to pay his debts by murdering his creditors.

Goodge: Beware, Mr. Meredith, beware! I owe Lord Woodbie nothing.

Tom: You're a liar, and your friends there know it.

Mo: Jumping Moses! I know him to be a most honorable member of society. He vouldn't tell a lie on no account.

Goodge: Why then do you wish to take his place?

Tom:
Because you have stung the woman I love, and we believe in Yorkshire that the vermin rankles in the wound only as long as the vermin lives.-- Goodge: Your abuse shall not provoke me to meet you in his place. [Julia on R.U.E.] Nor does your bluster shield him from the brand of cowardice. [Enter Julia dressed as Woodbie, comes down a little T^.C.]

Tom: Woodbie—

Bob: He has come to the post arter all.

Mo: Wonders will never cease.

Goodge: Come, gentlemen, we have lost enough time; measure the ground, Colonel.

Mo: He vorks like a policeman, don’t he? [Bob crosses with pistol case to Goodge, Mulligan, passes from R.iE. to L.U.E. and places handkerchiefs]

Goodge: Your weapons are loaded, I presume?

Tom: I beg you, my lord, not to pursue this affair. This man is unworthy to meet you.

Goodge: Lord Woodbie should have thought of that before he insulted me. I am here to meet his challenge; if he fails to meet me, I’ll treat him as the boy you wish to make him out. I’ve brought my horsewhip.

Julia: [Imitating Woodbie's voice] Proceed!

Mull: My man stands yonder; I have placed handkerchiefs at the distance. There is no choice of light, I think. Place your principal quickly, for look yonder, there is a movement on the pier, and we may be interrupted.

Tom: [Having given pistol to Julia, places her LUE] I shall permit only one exchange of shots.

Goodge: One will be enough. [Takes place R.iE.]

Mull: [LUE.] Is all ready? Will you give me the word?

Tom: No! [Down iE.]

Mull: Then I will. On the word "three," gentlemen, you fire together.

Mo: Hold hard; let me get out of the way. The bullet might go through him into me.

Mull: Now, gentlemen, are you ready? Now! One, two, three. [Goodge fires]

Tom: Woodbie has not fired. [Runs up to Julia. Julia staggers to Tom's arms]

Bob: He is falling!

Goodge: He has it; he has it! [Goes R.iE.]

Mull: Away wid you, quick. [Exit Mulligan and Goodge R.iE., followed by Mo]

Tom: Woodbie, speak! Where are you hurt? [Enter Lord Woodbie L.] 

Wood: [Down .R.C.] Am I too late?

All: Woodbie! Who, then, is this? [White Lime on]

Julia: [Throws off hat] I am not hurt, Cecil, I—

All: Julia!

QUICK ACT-DROP

ACT III.

Scenei: Neat chamber in Nat Gosling s London lodgings. Julia discovered on sofa, Katey attending her. Nat with them. Table with physics, bottles, etc.

Katey: Come, dear, just take this, and you’ll be right in no time.

Nat: It’ll put you as right as a trivet.

Julia: Thanks, friends, thanks. I’m really not hurt, only this pain in my shoulder.

Nat: The doctor said it was only a flesh wound.

Katey: Nothing serious! But, oh, how delightfully romantic, and all for the sake of the man you love. Oh, what wouldn’t I give for a chance to be shot for Tom.

Nat: For shame, Katey, for shame!

Katey: Grandfather, if it would do Tom any good, I’d have my arm shot off.

Nat: What fond creatures these women are.

Katey: Perhaps he’d know that I loved him, then—and—and—

Nat: And then p’raps he’d marry you.

Katey: Oh, Grandfather! [Blushing]

Nat: And a nice thing it’d be to marry a one-armed wife.
I wonder how the babies 'ud get on when they wanted nursing.

Katey. Oh! Go along, do!

Julia. What has become of my uncle?

Nat. After the duel, Goodge left before he discovered that it was you he had been firing at. You were brought over in the mail boat by Mr. Tom and Bob Buckskin, and brought here till it was decided what was to be done.

Julia. I hope that Mr. Meredith has done his best to hush the matter up; no good could come of its being made public.

Katey. Not a word has been said, or the newspapers might have made columns of it.

Julia. I wouldn't have it made known on any account. [Bob faocl^s at door L.]

Bob. [Calls outside] Nat, are you at home?

Nat. There's Bob Buckskin.

Katey. Come in, Bob. [Opens door. Enter Bob}

Bob. 'Um d'ye do, Miss. Hope you're better.

Julia. Oh, it's nothing.

Nat. Calls a bullet in her shoulder nothing. Some of our bold militia would declare on for a pension for half as much.

Bob. She ain't got it there now, has she?

Katey. No, no! The doctor extracted the bullet, and said that with perfect quiet, it was only a question of a few days before she'll be able to get about again.

Julia. I'm so sorry I shan't be able to go to the Derby, I should so like to see it.

Nat. Yes, Flying Scud is going to win in a canter.

Bob. That's a moral; a dead certainty.

Julia. I should like to send a message to my uncle that I'm comparatively unhurt.

Nat. Oh, he knows all about it; I sent him a message as soon as the doctor left. I knew your uncle very well, Miss, I saw him only yesterday on business, and have to see him again today about a horse.

Julia. My uncle knew nothing of my taking Lord Woodbie's place, and had he done so, would have done everything possible to prevent it.

Nat. Well, he may be your uncle, Miss, but I'm afraid he ain't twenty-two carat.

Katey. Hush, Grandfather! Hush!

Bob. Well, always speak of a man as you find him; and if he ain't a regular scorcher, I never met one.

Katey. How rude of you, Bob.

Julia. Believe me, friends, my uncle is not so bad as he appears to be. He has been led away by his companions, Captain Grindley Goodge and Mr. Davis.

Nat. Very likely, Miss, but you know the old adage, "Birds of a feather flock together."

Bob. Some of these days I'll let Mr. Jumping Moses have it, and if I get about him, he won't have many feathers left on him to flock with anybody.

Nat. Bob, if I have any more of such horrible sentiments, I'll have you bound down to keep the peace.

Katey. [At window] Good gracious, there's a carriage drawn up to our door, and an old lady and a young gentleman have got out of it.

Nat. P'raps it's Mrs. Soursawkins, the greengrocery woman, calling with her son about a bottle of embrocation I promised for the boy's leg; he strained himself at football.

Bob. [At window] It ain't Mother Soursawkins, it's too much of a swell.

Katey. Why I do believe it's young Lord Woodbie.

Julia. [Starting] Lord Woodbie; Cecil here!

Bob. And the old lady is his mother, Lady Woodbie.

Nat. Quality visitors, by jingo! [Loud knock and ring heard]

Julia. Can she be coming here to upbraid me?

Nat. Will you go to the door, Katey, or shall I?
Katey.

I'll go, Grandfather; you stay here.

Nat.

Now what can bring them here?

Bob whispers to Nat. Yes, I shouldn't be surprised a bit. Whispers to Bob. D'ye think so? Well, that would be nuts to crack.

Bob.

Well, you see if that ain’t a very good guess at it.

Nat.

I only hope that it may be so.

Katey re-enters door.

Katey.

Lady Woodbie and her son wish to see our visitor, Miss Julia.

Nat.

All right, Katey, only remember the doctor’s orders, she wasn’t to be upset on no account.

Lady Woodbie enters, followed by Lord Woodbie.

Lady W.

You will excuse this unceremonious visit, I’m sure. To Nat. Where is she?

Nat points to Julia.

Nat.

Here she is, mum—leastways I suppose you’re enquiring after Miss Julia?

Lady W.

The generous girl who risked her life to save that of my son.

Bob whispers to Nat. There, what did I tell you?

Nat.

You’re as good as a horicle.

Lady W. up to sofa.

Miss Latimer, I have already wronged you; I did not know your truly noble disposition. I thought you a scheming woman, endeavoring to entrap my son’s affections for the sake of his fortune. I humbly beg your pardon. Will you forgive me?

Julia.

Oh, Lady Woodbie, how can you ask me such a thing? I am afraid that for Cecil’s—I beg pardon—Lord Woodbie’s sake, you speak so to me.

Wood.

Dear Julia, my mother at last knows you for the dear good girl that you truly are, and it is by her own wish, and not by my solicitations, that she is here.

Lady W.

I know all; I have heard everything. You knew of the projected duel, and for my son’s sake, you kept the matter secret, and took his place on Calais Sands. You risked your life to save his mother from a lifelong misery. From my heart I thank you.

Julia.

I am grateful to you, my lady, for your kindness, which shall never be forgotten by me. All I hope is, that Lord Woodbie will not seek to meet Captain Goodge again.

Lady W.

My son has now solemnly promised that he will not meet the man.

Wood.

Unless it be to tell him what I think of him—

Lady W.

You must not be so impetuous, Cecil.

Wood.

All right, mother, I’ll endeavor to bottle up my sentiments.

Lady W.

And now, Miss Latimer, I have something of the greatest importance to say to you.

Nat.

Shall we retire, mum?

Bob.

Yes, shall we go outside on the mat?

Lady W.

No, no, remain here, my good friends, for I should like you to hear what I am about to say. I have cruelly wronged this young lady by my suspicions of her, and I should like her and you to know that I am truly sorry for it.

Julia.

Do not again allude to it, my lady, I beg.

Lady W.

My son, Cecil, knows what I am about to say. When he first spoke to me of marriage with you, I did all in my power to oppose it. Now I ask you to grace our family by becoming a member of it. I ask you to honor me by accepting my son’s hand.

Nat whispers to Bob. Well, hang me, if the old lady ain’t been and popped the question. I wonder what sort of a Leap Year this comes in?

Lady W.

Your answer, Julia?

Julia.

Oh, my lady, what answer can I make?

Wood.

Say that you will marry me by special license, and that you’ll come with me to the Derby tomorrow and see Flying Scud win the blue ribbon of the turf.

Julia.

But the doctor?
Nat. Doctor "Cupid" is the best physician in the world.

Scene 2: Mulligan's rooms.

Enter Mulligan and Mo Davis. Mulligan crosses back and forwards.

Mo: What's your caper?

Mull: Oh, man, the devil's luck, and the worst of it is on us.

Mo: Why, how's that?

Mull: Sure it wasn't Woodbie at all we shot at Calais, but that poor girl of mine, who took his place.

Mo: What! Julia dead!

Mull: No, praise be to Heaven, scarcely wounded. Goodge's bullet only scratched her arm, and she has hardly a mark. But, by the blood of the Mulligans, it might have been worse. I have heard from Katey Rideout, that Julia is progressing favorably at Nat Gosling's lodgings.

Mo: Hush, here's Goodge.

[Enter Goodge L.iE]

Well, what's the state of the market?

Goodge: [Throwing tissue] There's the latest betting. How do you like it?

Mo: [Reads tissue] "5 to 4 on Flying Scud."

Mull: Oh, it's a misprint.

Mo: "7 to 2 against Voltigeur; 4 to 1 against Rasper; 4 to 1 against Locomotive," taken freely.

Goodge: Now, gentlemen, Woodbie having escaped my bullet through Julia's romantic folly, if Tom Meredith's horse wins the Derby, where shall we be?

Mull: Well, I should think in Australia within three months, feeding sheep.

Mo: I'll be sold for my weight in cat's meat.

Goodge: It's popular opinion that our horse, Voltigeur, isn't in it with Flying Scud, and Meredith's horse will win as sure as the sun shines. If so, every penny we have staked will be lost.

Mo: Oo! What'll become of me? Oo, jumping Moses, why didn't the measles carry me off when I was young and innocent?

Mull: What's to be done?

Goodge: I'm for squaring the jockey. Who's the boy that gets the mount?

Mull: There's no depending on the honor of them boys; they'll be taking your money and throw you over. I've been robbed fifty times that way.

Mo: Don't! O—0—0! I was treated shameful this morning. I'm all over from it.

Goodge: You don't know whom we have to deal with. After the affair on Calais Sands, Julia was taken to Nat Gosling's lodgings by Tom Meredith. I went there to make enquiries about her, and got into conversation with old Nat Gosling. He is feeling very sore about Tom Meredith's behavior to Katey, his granddaughter. Julia has escaped with a scratch on the shoulder; I saw the doctor, and he says she'll be out in a couple of days, more frightened than hurt.

Mo: Well, if I got a bullet in me, I should die of fright.

Goodge: Don't I tell you it only skimmed her shoulder?

Mo: Well, I think if it only skimmed me anywhere, it 'ud be more than enough. Oh, jumping Moses!

Mull: But what were you going to say about Flying Scud and Nat Gosling?

Goodge: Well, I was going to say that he scarcely ever leaves the horse; that he almost lives in the stable. Last Christmas he got in six-months feed, and sleeps on it. The water the animal drinks is tested daily with litmus paper, and there's special police dotted round the park where Flying Scud takes his morning gallop.

Mo: It's worse than Sebastopol to get into.

Goodge: So I thought to myself, why does old Nat stand by Meredith so strongly? When that snob found himself master of my fortune, he threw over Katey Rideout and broke off with her.
Nat must want to serve him out for that, so I boldly proposed an offer; he hesitated; at last he consented to call on me here today. Now I propose that we run him with an offer of two thousand pounds, and knock him off his legs.

Mull: Two thousand pounds!

Mo: Say! Wouldn’t he take something off for his revenge? He gets that in.

Mull: But where are we to get the money?

Goodge: By one bold stroke for fortune. As Woodbie would not lend us the money, we have borrowed his name on account for the two thousand pounds.

Mo: On another bill. Lawyer Quail has advanced the money on it. He wants to get a slice of the young lord’s ruin.

Goodge: We shall be sure to take it up tomorrow after the race, so there’s no risk of discovery.

Mull: Is there no fear of being found out?

Mo: No, no! Goodge is the best forger I know. Besides, as I said, it’s sure to be taken up.

Mull: Yes, it’s sure to be taken up.

Mo: So long as we aren’t taken up, I don’t mind.

Goodge: I’ve just come from Quail’s office, and asked him to accommodate us by cashing Lord Woodbie’s acceptance. Of course he hadn’t got the cash in the place, but promised to go and get it from the bank. You go round there and get the money; you’ll be back in ten minutes.

Mo: There’s a something about it that I don’t like.

Goodge: Nonsense! You’ll get your share, won’t you?

Mo: Veil, where is the forged document?

Goodge: [Takes it from pocket-book] There it is.

Mo: The signature is beautiful; I can scarcely tell it from Lord Woodbie’s own writing. Captain, you’re a clever fellow, you deserve to be transported.

Goodge: What?

Mo: I mean promoted with an award of merit. You write beautifully. You’re a credit to the school board. I say, suppose old Quail wants any receipt for the money?

Goodge: Oh, just endorse the bill, or give him any receipt he likes. Don’t be frightened, man—we shall be all one thing or the other after the race. We’ve gone too far to think of sliding back now.

Mull: Come along, Davis, I’ll go with you.

Mo: Yes, and you’ll endorse the bill.

Mull: Oh, it won’t do for Quail to see me in the matter. You’re his client.

Mo: Oh—oh! Jumpin’ Moses, if it’s found out.

Mull: You didn’t see our objections till just now.

Mo: I don’t think I sees ’em now. I vos thinking of myself; I vosn’t thinking of you. Ain’t there no other way?

Goodge: None! If we are to share the plunder, we must first divide the risk; but there is no risk.

Mull: None at all. It will sure to be taken up.

Mo: That’s what we shall all be if it ain’t. [Knock L.]

Goodge: Hallo, here’s Nat. You go out the back way, both of you, while I admit him. Get back as quickly as you can.

Mull: We shan’t be many minutes. [Exit Mo and Mulligan R.iE.]

Nat: [Outside L.] Does Captain Grindley Goodge live here?

Goodge: Step this way, Mr. Gosling. [Enter Nat] I asked you to visit me this morning, because I wish to explain to you how sorry I am that my little attentions to your granddaughter have injured her so much. But why will she not let me square the matter? Come, if she is a little fool, you are a sensible fellow.

Nat: I am sir, uncommon; try me.

Goodge: Although Meredith has jilted Katey, you stick to him and his fortunes.
[Aside] This seems like a shady deal. [To Goodge and Mulligan] We need to be careful and make sure we don't get caught.

Nat. [Continuing] And if he loses, well, it's just bad luck, ain't it?

Goodge. [Nervously] Yes, yes, of course.

Mulligan. [Suspiciously] Are you sure this will work?

Nat. [Confidently] Trust me, boys. I've done this before. Just leave everything to me.

Mo. [Uneasily] I don't know about this. It doesn't seem right.

Nat. [Sternly] Look, you want to make some money, don't you? This is the easiest way. Just do as I say and we'll all be rich.

Goodge. [Excitedly] Yes, let's do it! We'll be millionaires!

Mulligan. [Reluctantly] Alright, but if we get caught, it's on your head.

Nat. [Dismissively] Don't worry, we won't get caught. Now let's go and make some money. [Exeunt all]
Scene 1: Interior of a stable. 

[Enter Nat Gosling, Mo Davis, Goodge, and Mull.]

Nat. [to Mo Davis] If he wins after I've fixed him, I'll heat him, hoofs and all.

Nat. [to all] No cruelty, mind.

Mo. He'll catch nothing more than a slight cold that will make his coat stare, that's all.

Nat. After that, Meredith must win with him, if he can.

All. Aye; ha, ha! If he can!

Nat. I'll do my best, mind ye, and if ye get in a hole after all—

Goodge. We'll forgive you.

Nat. That's your sort.

Mull. Our fortunes are made. [Exit 1?.]

Goodge. [Crossing L.] And Meredith is broken, for tonight the favorite will be nobbled. [Exit 1?.]

Mo. Yes, he'll have a severe attack of the vishy washy villy vobbles. [Exit R.]

Nat. Will he? Well, I shouldn't be surprised if some of you will have an attack of the washy willy wobbles before you've done.


Scene 3: Front scene on road to stable.

[Enter Bob, Jerry and Ned Compo with stable lads L.iE.]

Jerry and Omnes. Tell us all about it, Bob.

Bob. Well, give a chap time to breathe.

Ned. Ah, you've got too much flesh about you, Bob, to breathe comfortably.

Bob. Have I? Well, it ain't got nothing to do with you if I have.

Jerry. You ought to try Doctor Skinner's mixture, that 'ud bring you down.

Bob. I've had gallons of it.

Ned. I fancy chloride of lime and Condy's Fluid mixed with a little benzoline and Mrs. Allan's Restorer would do him a world of good.

Bob. Yes, it might prepare me for another world.

Jerry. Bob, tell us about Nat Gosling, Mo Davis and the rest.

Omnes. Yes, tell us, tell us!

Bob. Well, first and foremost, there's a-going to be a fashionable wedding in high circles and society—Colonel Mulligan's niece, Julia Latimer, is a-going to marry young Lord Woodbie. I was present when the consent was given, and Katey and me is a-going to be one of the bridesmaids, and I'm going to be the best man.

Jerry. Well, if you're going to be the best man, some of the others must be rather rum 'uns.

Bob. If you insult me any more, Mr. Jeremiah Cobbler, I shall be under the painful necessity of giving you a smack in the jaw.

Jerry. What?

Bob. You heard what I said, a smack in the j-a-w.

Jerry. Oh, you will, will you. You'll have to go into training first.

Bob. [Threatening] What?

Jerry. [Squaring up] Eh? [Business]

Ned. Come boys, don't quarrel.

Jerry. Well, what did he want to say he'd smack me in the jaw for?

Ned. Now, Bob, tell us all about Nat and the shufflers.

Bob. Well, after the bit of a bother on Calais Sands, Miss Julia left her uncle's house, and came to Miss Katey at Nat Gosling's lodgings. Captain Grindley Goodge came there after her, and got talking matters over with Nat Gosling, and I believe there's a bit of business on. [Mysteriously]

Ned. Business! What sort?

Jerry. I thought Nat Gosling wouldn't mix up with such a set.

Bob. Oh, leave Nat alone, he's got his head screwed on the right way. [whistles outside]

Jerry. Hush, I hear Nat's whistle.

Bob. Then he can tell ye himself what's up. [Enter Nat L.iE.]

Nat. Well, Bob, have you told the boys?

Bob. Some of it, but not all.

Nat. Now lads, to make a long story short, I've sold the race tomorrow. Goodge and his party have tipped me two thousand pounds to let them nobble Flying Scud, and I've got the money, and have promised them the key of the stables.
JERRY: Why Nat, all the stable is on the favorite.
NED: We all know, Nat, that Mister Meredith didn’t behave fair and square to your granddaughter, Miss Katey, but we didn’t think you’d take such a revenge as this. Howsomedever, I’m going to ride Flying Scud, and it’ll be a fair race. I’ll ride to win, and it wouldn’t be twenty thousand pounds that would stop me putting Scud first past the winning post if he’s the best horse in the field.
JERRY and REST: Bravo, Ned! Stick to that!
NAT: Ned Compo, I know’d a man as lived in Oundle in Northamptonshire as made his fortune—and d’ye know how? by minding his own business. You mind yourn, and let Nat Gosling, the oldest man in the stable, speak.
JERRY: Go on, Nat, let’s hear the finish of it. What have you got to say?
NAT: Well, boys, as observed afore I was took up short, I’ve promised the key of Flying Scud’s stable, and two o’ them will be here tonight to fix the favorite.
JERRY: Nat, Nat, I couldn’t have believed it of you.
NAT: Will ye shut up till I’ve done? I promised ’em the key of Flying Scud’s stable, but didn’t promise the Scud should be in it when they came. Now there’s another horse, Voltigeur, a regular outsider, that’s supposed to make the running for Tom Flyer, that’s been backed heavily by Captain Goodge, Mulligan and Mo Davis. His stables are at the end of the yard. Dick Purvis has had to go home, and there’s the key of his box. Voltigeur is the very image of Flying Scud—as like as two peas. You two [pointing to Jerry and Ned] go and bring it down to our stables, change the horse cloths, and let those chaps nobble their own fancy horse, instead of the pride of our stables. What do you say to that, boys, eh?
JERRY: What! Let ’em nobble the wrong horse?
NAT: Precisely! And then put them in the hole they intended for us. And as for the money I’ve got from ’em, it shall be fairly shared by every lad in the stable.
JERRY and OMNES: Hurroy! “Old Boots” for ever!
NAT: [Looking L.] There they are at the end of the lane. You go and meet ’em, Bob; don’t bring ’em to the stable for about ten minutes or a quarter of an hour. Tell ’em it ain’t safe for ’em to come about till we’re quite ready for ’em.
BOB: All right, leave ’em to me. [Exit L.]
NAT: [To Ned and Jerry] You go and fetch Voltigeur; here’s the key.
JERRY: Right you are, Nat. Come along, Ned. [Exeunt L.]
NAT: [To rest] You go to the yard and keep a sharp lookout. [Stable lads exit 7?.] And now, Master Goodge and Co., I wonder how you’ll like being caught in your own trap. Tread Tom Meredith under your heel, will yer? Not while Nat Gosling is on this side of the turf. Give Flying Scud an attack of the wishy washy willy wabbles? Not if I know it, not if I know it. [Exit R. UT. Re-enter Bob with Goodge, Mo Davis, disguised, L.]
BOB: This is the way to the stables, gents, but you’d better wait in the lodge for about a quarter of an hour; some of the stable boys are about, and it ’ud be just as well to give ’em time to get out of the way.
MO: Right you are. Goodge, you look spiffin; a regular business-like cut about your jib. I declare, your mother wouldn’t know you.
GOODGE:
Stow your chaff, Davis, I’m in no humor for it. If we miss the game we have in hand, it will be rather serious, for I’m ruined.

Mo. So am I—so are we all—we’re all ruined. But there ain't no chance of anything going wrong. Haven’t we parted to two thousand quid? Only fancy, two thousand thich ’uns to be left alone with a gee-gee a couple of minutes.

Goodge. If Nat Gosling acts on the square, one minute will be quite enough for me.

Bob. Now, gentlemen, we’d better get inside the lodge and wait.

Mo. All right, my dear. It’s rather cold; have a drop of this. [Offers]

Bob. No thank you, sir, no thank you. You may drug your horses, but you don’t drug me.

Mo. Oh, jumpin’ Moses! What a lot of suspicious people there are about.

Goodge. Well, come on, Mo, the sooner the job is over, the better I shall like it.

Mo. And the longer we are over it, the verser I shall like it. [Business: Mo going to drink out of bottle, Goodge takes it from him and pockets it] Goodge. None of that just now.

Mo. Oh, ain't he selfish? Wants it all himself. [Exeunt R.iE.]

[Scene 4: Stable yard by night, Illuminated village in the distance, palings round loose boxes. Jackson discovered watching. Nat whistles outside.]

Jack. Hallo! Who’s that? [Whistles repeated] Is that you, Nat Gosling? [Enter Nat through gate]

Nat. Yes, it’s me. If I told ye it was somebody else, you wouldn’t believe it.

Jack. I was expecting the farriers, and thought it might be one of ’em.

Nat. All right, you needn’t wait now. Go and look if you see any signs of the farriers on the road.

Jack. Right you are, Nat. [Exit through gate]

Nat. I wonder whether Flying Scud’s awake? [Unlocks half door] Ah, there he is—come over, my beauty. [Business: with horse's head] Thought to hocuss ye, did they? Well, we shall see, we shall see. Wants to give ye a dose, do they? Well, what’s good for Flying Scud can’t be bad for Voltigeur. Talk about diamond cut diamond, or a Roland for an Allover!—why it ain’t in it. They’d give yer wishy washy willy wobbles, would they? I’ll wash ’em inside out before I’ve done with ’em. [Jerry gives peculiar whistle outside] Hallo! There they are. [Imitates whistle] All right, my pippins, the coast is clear. [Enter Jerry and Ned leading the horse, Voltigeur, through gate]

Jerry. Here ye are, Nat, this is Captain Goodge’s horse, Voltigeur. We’ve managed it. The stable boy is asleep. [Village clock strides in the distance]

Nat. Hark! Time’s up! They’ll be here in a quarter of an hour, or less. Good evening, Voltigeur, sorry to put you to any inconvenience, but we shall just trouble you to take Flying Scud’s place in the stable for a few minutes, and after your master’s physicked you, you can go back to your own stable.

Jerry. Come along, Nat. Is Scud ready for the change?

Nat. All serene, my beauty. [Music. Nat brings Flying Scud out, and Jerry with Nat change the two horse cloths on the two horses] Now put Voltigeur in Flying Scud’s stable, and put the Scud in the spare box. Good, good! Now we’ll see who’ll have an attack of the wishy washy willy wobbles. Watch, boys, at the end of the lane, and when you see Goodge and Moses disguised as farriers coming, give me the signal.
Jerry: Right you are, Nat. Come on, Ned.
[Ned and Jerry exit through gate]

Nat: Now they can come; I’m ready for them.
[Nat opens half of stable door and repeats business with horse's head]
They thought to get at ye, did they? They thought I’d sell you. I’d rather sell me life. See here now, and listen to your ould nuss. The heye of all civilization is on ye this day, and you know it. You’re as vain as a peacock, and as pooty as paint. They’ll come to spile you, my dear; and arter their cookery, they’ll expect to find you strip tomorrow, and show a coat like a stubble field. Ay! but you will come out like satin in the sunshine. I kin the faces they’ll pull at that. Then, my cock-a-wax, you’ll pace among the admiring crowd, moving like suthin’ between a woman and a steam engine. That’s when the ring will feel it. I hear ’em at it now. The odds arisin’, and bilin’ over. Then you’ll take your gallop, my pippin, and when they sees your loopin’ stride, they’ll put settlin’ day afore their heyes in the biggest kind o’ print. Now we’re at the post. Be quiet—no pullin’—steady! Down goes the flag—easy! Now ye knows what’s in ye. Wait on Rasper. Keep a heye on Locomotive. Round ye go, shakin’ off ruck, and takin’ of it easy till the turn where I showed yer. Then Ned will let yer go, and then go it. Locomotive is shook off like a flea. Don’t ye hear the outsiders saying, “Yalla! Yalla wins!” And the edicated, a crying “Flying Scud!—The Scud ahead!” as ye go? My heart gets in my mouth. Rasper is close behind; ye may feel his pipes, as he puts on a spirt at the finish. He gains your quarter; Ned calls on ye; ye quit him like a bullet, and pass the post, held hard. Four lengths ahead; time—quickest on record. There’s your programme! If ye falls short on it, never put your nose in my face again.
[Nat puts horse back. Goodge and Mo Davis enter disguised R.iE.]
Mo: [Aside to Goodge] That’s the crib. I’ve been takin’ stock of the lodgings, and know the jography.
Goodge: All right.
[They enter the box]
Mo: Here’s my patent fixer—here it is. That will make his coat stare just for a day or two, eh?
[Mo exits into box]
Nat: Ah! and it will make you stare for a year or two, or I’m mistook. Let’s see what they’re arter.
[Nat looks into their box]
Who is that at the head of the hoss? Oh, that’s Davis. ’Tother one is going over his plates. Take keer; Voltigeur is ’andy with his heels—he’ll ketch ye a wipe in a minute. The fust thing you’ll know, you’ll know nothin’.
[Goodge and Mo Davis bring on horse Voltigeur. They drug him on stage]
Goodge: There now, stand still!
Mo: ’Old ye head still, can’t ye? There, that’ll do ye a lot of good. Oh, jumpin’ Moses! He’s bit my finger.
Goodge: He’s got it! Our fortunes are made!
Mo: We’ve nobbled the horse. We’ve nobbled the favorite.
[They dance with joy]
Nat: [Aside] Yes, and I’ve nobbled you!
[Scene 5: Front scene near Epsom Downs. Crowds of people, such as frequent races. Thimble riggers, Negro minstrels, vendors of race cards and dolls, vans, tents, drags, costermongers’ carts, etc.]
WOODBIE AND JULIA IN A PHAETON

[Negro minstrel song is going on. Enter gipsy who tells Julia’s fortune, while two cockneys are taken in by the thimble riggers. Enter policeman. The thimble riggers decamp. This scene should maintain several natural episodes in pantomime during the dialogue. A murmur outside. Enter Lord Woodbie and Julia accompanied by Lady Woodbie.]

Lady W.: Come, my dear, this is the way to the course. We shall find our carriage just beside the stand.

Julia: Lady Woodbie, I hope some day to be able to prove my gratitude.

Wood: Gratitude for what? For making me the happiest fellow alive? When the preliminaries are all settled, there will be nothing to delay our marriage.

Lady W.: Ah, my dear boy, you are so impetuous.

Wood: Everything is prepared for our departure to the Continent, and won't we have a jolly honeymoon? [Enter Jerry L.]

Jerry: A word with you, my lord.

Lady W.: Come, my dear, this way to our carriage. [Exeunt J?.]

Wood: Ladies, I'll join you in a few minutes. Well, my lad, what is it?

Jerry: Mr. Meredith's compliments to you, sir, and he wants you to know that Captain Goodge's horse, Voltigeur, is took bad; can't run; in fact, scratched. He's anxious about you, as he's afraid you might be backing it, seeing as how you used to be so thick with the price.

Wood: Thanks! But I haven't backed it for a penny. All my bets are on the favorite, Flying Scud.

Jerry: And it's as sure to win as if it had already passed the post. [Enter Captain Goodge]

Goodge: Ah, good day, Lord Woodbie. Glad to see you looking so well.

Wood: You will oblige me, sir, by considering we are not on speaking terms.

Goodge: Oh, indeed! Not on speaking terms, eh?

Wood: I have promised my mother, Lady Woodbie, never to speak to you again.

Goodge: Quite right! Always do what your mammy tells you. Poor boy, you're not old enough to think for yourself. You ought to be ashamed of yourself.

Wood: I hope I shall never be ashamed of taking my mother's advice.

Goodge: Yes, you were always a favorite with the ladies. It isn't every fellow that can get a woman to go out and fight his battles for him. Thank goodness for the honor of old England, it isn't every milksop that can persuade a poor girl to dress herself in male attire and risk being shot to save her so-called lover's life.

Wood: Why you infernal scoundrel! Do you dare to insinuate that I knew anything of—

Goodge: Oh, of course you knew nothing about it. [Changing tone] It isn't likely. There isn't a man in the club but shall know all about it, and your cowardly behavior. Lord Woodbie, you knew perfectly well that Julia was going to take your place.

Wood: [With suppressed passion] Captain Goodge, you're a liar! [Strides him with glove in face]

Goodge: I'll horsewhip you on the course, in the presence of your friends. [Enter Tom Meredith]

Tom: Oh, no you won't! For if you try it on, I'll break your neck.

Jerry: And if he doesn't care to soil his hands by contaminating them with your lavender water body, I'll see what I can do. [Squares up]

Goodge: So, you cowardly cur, you've got your bullies close at hand to protect you.

Tom: Come along, Lord Woodbie. Remember your promise to your mother.

Wood: Yes, but I—

Tom: Come, come! No more words! Follow me!

Goodge: Yes, take him to his mother.
Get his mother to mind him. Tie him to her apron strings for safety--but that would be rather awkward--perhaps the old lady doesn't wear aprons!

Wood. Why, I'll--[Business. Tom gets Lord Woodbie off]

Jerry. [To Goodge] I'd give five pounds just to have you in our backyard for ten minutes. [Exit. More variety business introduced here. Enter Mulligan L.]

Goodge. There's a report that there's something wrong in the crack's stable. The betting is down to even, and three to two against him. [A cheer outside]

Mull. What's the matter now? [Enter Mo Davis L.U.E.]

Mo. Oh, dear! Oh, s'elp me! Oo--Oo!

Goodge. What are you dancing about?

Mo. There's been a mistake. I don't know! Eh! Voltigeur is scratched--he's amiss!

Goodge. Who cares?

Mo. Yes, but Flying Scud is--is--

Goodge. What, man? Speak! [A cheer outside]

Mo. You hear? He is as clean as I am--cleaner--nothing the matter with him. We're done!

Goodge. It is impossible! Damnation, man! You didn't give him the physic, then?

Mo. Yes, I did.

Goodge. He didn't swallow it, then?

Mo. Yes, he did.

Goodge. Then it didn't work.

Mo. I didn't go along vid it to see. [Enter Tom Meredith with super L.iE.]

Tom. I'll bet three to one on Flying Scud! Three to one in hundreds.

Super. Done!

Tom. Done, and again.

Goodge. No; enough on.

Tom. He's a picture! Thanks to old Nat, he never peeled in such form as he does today. [Cheers outside] There! That's at him, again. The public could eat him up every bit.

Mo. [2?.] So could I. I'd bolt him whole if I vos along wid him.

Goodge. [Aside] There has been some villainy here.

Mo. We are the victims! I'm a victim!

Goodge. We can't get at the horse, but we can get at the jockey. Ned Compo is the lad. I'll fix the boy. Come with me. [Exeunt Goodge and Mo Davis L.iE. Variety business and introductions, five niggers ending with chasing the welcher. Enter Nat L.UJL]

Nat. Now, sir, I've come for orders; how's the lad to ride?

Tom. Give him your own advice, Nat, I can't improve on it. I think we have nothing to fear; let him ride as he may.

Nat. Nothin' is sure till it has happened.

Tom. Let him take the lead then, and keep it.

Nat. He can last, but won't give thirty shillings in change for a severing. [Bell rings outside] There's the "clear the course." Ah, the old blood begins to tell inside me; my werry back gets lithsome, and I feel the old jockey amovin' in me strong. [Business. Enter Bob running L.U£.]

Bob. Where is he? Where's Nat?

Nat. Here I be. Wot's up?

Bob. Oh, lor'! Here's a go--oh, sir, Ned, sir, Ned Compo--

Tom. Well?

Bob. He's been and took bad, sir.

Nat. Took bad? How?

Bob. All over, sir. Down at the mouth. Here he is. [Enter crowd with Ned very pale]

Ned. Oh, Lord! Oh, dear!

Nat. Wot's up?

Ned. 'Tain't what's up, it's what's down. I'm nobbled.

Tom. What d'ye mean?

Ned. I jest took a small drain of brandy as a gent offered me--wery kind he was--and a moment arter, I couldn't keep my saddle.
NAT: By jinks! They couldn’t fix the horse, so they got at the jockey.
MO: [Aside] Grindley Goodge, for a thousand. [Bell outside]
NAT: Oh, dear—Oh, mussy me! The warmints; they’ve ruined ye, Tom; and my beauty can’t run.
ALL: Shame! Shame!
NAT: [Suddenly] Yes, he shall, by jinks! I’ll double on ’em all yet. Peel the colors off that boy; gi’ me his cap. [Throws off his overcoat] I ain’t rode a race for five and twenty years. [Enter Katey L.iE.]
KATEY: Oh, Grandfather, what are you going to do?
NAT: Do, girl? I’m going to ride Flying Scud for the Derby. I’m four pounds overweight, but a pound or two won’t count ’tween me and him. [Re-enter Goodge and Mo Davis L.]
GOODGE: The favorite can’t win.
NAT: [Dressed] Can’t he? But he will, though.
MO: Who will ride him?
NAT: I will! “Old Boots!”
CROWD: Hurray! Hurray! [Exit Nat L.UE.]
MULL: The old man is crazy.
TOM: I am ruined—he can’t have it in him at his age to pilot such a dare-devil animal. [Cheers outside]
GOODGE: [A.] How d’ye feel now, Meredith?
TOM: I feel like an honest man. How do you feel?
GOODGE: Rich as a pie!
WOOD: There they go! By Jove, the old fellow is in the saddle. [Cheers] The crowd recognize him—hark how they cheer. [Cheers outside]
KATEY: He’s up and off; but will he ever be able to stick on?
CROWD: Now then, make way a litde. Where are you shoving to? [Bell. Cheers. A rowland a fight, during which a tent is knocked down on one side and the carriages, etc., are moved off at the other so that the whole course and spectators, grandstand, etc., become visible. The police enter. Order is reestablished. Bell rfzzgr]
CROWD: There they are. There, they are off. No, they ain’t. Yes, I tell yer—see! Which is him in front—black and tan cap? That’s Kettledrum colt. No—yes! Where’s Nat? Where’s the favorite?
GOODGE: He’s nowhere! Look! He will be off in a minute.
MO: I vish he may break his neck. Oh, my inside is going it. Keep an eye on him.
MULL: Green and black is ahead. They’ll never catch him. They’re down in the hollow.
KATEY: Oh, Mr. Meredith, it is all Grandfather’s fault, sir, if you are ruined.
TOM: Katey! If I could see into your heart, and know the truth! I’d rather win you than the Derby, but that is impossible.
KATEY: Alas! [The crowd have turned and now watch the open course at the other side]
ALL: Here they come! Here they come! Rasper is in front! Rasper! Rasper! No, Locomotive! [The cloud of horses and jockeys appear]
GOODGE: Locomotive and Rasper, neck and neck. Confederate, third. The favorite, a bad fourth.
TOM: Ay, but held—hard held. Now the old man is creeping on them. See! He catches Confederate, and passes.
CROWD: Rasper wins! Rasper wins! White and white!
TOM: The favorite for a thousand, even.
GOODGE: Done! Done!
TOM: Look! He collars Locomotive! Well done. Good race; good race! He’s at Rasper’s quarters! Now for it! Well done, Nat! Nat forever!
CROWD: Rasper! Flying Scud! Yalla wins! Rasper wins!
Flying Scud!
White! Flying Scud! Yalla, yalla! Hurray! Hurray! [-- Immense tumult. The grandstand is seen to flutter with hats and handkerchiefs. The crowd surge and sway in the distance. A number is seen to go up in the distance on the post. Renewed cheers. The course is flooded with the crowd.]

Tom: No.9! Flying Scud! [-- Frantic cheers. Enter policemen surrounding Nat, who is mounted on Flying Scud and is on his way to the weighing room. Mo Davis appears very ill in one corner, Goodge, Mulligan and Chousir in another, stamping with vexation.]

TABLEAU

ACT I.

Scene i: Mulligan's lodgings. Goodge, Mo Davis and Mulligan discovered.

Mo: Oh, jumpin' Moses, what's to become of us? We're like the poor little "Babes in the Wood," only there's three of us.

Mull: By the blood of the Mulligans, we're cornered. Our creditors will swarm on us like bees on a treacle cask, and I shall be disgraced. Me, the descendant of the Prince of Gath-na-cush, in a direct line with the Mulligans of Castle Mulligan; our noble blood is disgraced forever.

Goodge: Oh, damn your blood.

Mo: Yes, damn your blood. Vot's the good of blood; it won't get us out of this schermozzle. Oh, dear! Oh, dear! I never vos in such a scrape before. Vot's to be done? Vot's you going to do?

Goodge: Our only chance is immediate flight. We must get away from England at once.

Mo: Right you are! I'll go to the Argentine. I want to see my old friend, Jabez, and if once I get over, they'll never bring me back again.

Goodge: Why, you fool, we haven't got enough money to get so far.

Mo: Then let me go on a steamer as a poor little stowaway, in among the coals and bilge water. Oh, why didn't my mother put me in a pail when I was born?

Mull: It's no use talking, gentlemen, we must proceed to action at once. Julia has left me, and I have nothing now to live for. [-- Weeps]

Mo: Go on, crocodile, what are ye snivelling for? Look at the crocodile's tears running down the end of your nose.

Mull: Well, if they'd try to get down to the bottom of your nose, they couldn't.

Mo: Dat's right, dat's right, go on, abouse my nose now, just 'cos you can't pay your debts. Oh, this is an ungrateful world. I'm too good for it.

Goodge: Yes, you ought to have been an angel. Pity you haven't got a pair of wings.

Mo: And these are the men I once thought my friends. As Nebuchadnezzer said at the battle of Vaterloo, "And you, Brutus, go; never more be ossifer of mine."

Mull: What it comes to is this: how much money have we?

Goodge: Well, in the safe at our retreat at Lambeth Road, we've got about a hundred and twenty pounds.

Mo: Ve must divide it. Tell me how many times three times go into a hundred and twenty. Fifty—forty—thirty—seven. No, I vos never no good at figures. I'll have the hundred, and you shall have ten apiece; then I'll go to the Argentine, and throw myself on the mercy of the glorious republic; and when I'm settled down, I'll get up a subscription to send for you two to come over to me, and then we'll set up a branch establishment over there. D'ye see?

Goodge: We'll divide fairly, forty pounds apiece, and then take our chance.
It must be done at once; tomorrow will be too late.

Mo: Yes, it's a hold saying, and a true one, "That a bush in the hand is worth two in the bird," and "Never put off till today, what you can do tomorrow."

Goodge: Chuck it, Mo Davis, and let us settle details with Mulligan.

Mo: Dat's a nice way to speak to me after all I have done for you.

Mull: Well, go on, what do you propose?

Goodge: Well, I think it would be best to-- [Knock heard at door] Hush! What's that?

Mo: P'raps it's the man called for the taxes.

Mull: [Looking through keyhole] It's Quail, the lawyer.

Goodge: Open the door; we must brazen it out.

Mull: Come in, Mr. Quail, come in. [Enter Quail, with him two clerks who remain at door]

Goodge: To what are we indebted for the honor of this visit?

Quail: I daresay you can guess.

Goodge: I haven't the slightest idea.

Mull: Perhaps you have called to ask my instructions concerning the little bit of property I thought of buying in the borough.

Mo: Or perhaps to ask us to take some shares in the new company which is being floated to acquire the very prosperous walk stalls and oyster barrows in the borough, and amalgamate them with the lady's trotter baskets in Drury Lane. I'm told it's a sure certainty to pay twelve and a half per cent.

Quail: No, gentlemen, that is not my business. I have just heard that the bill I discounted for you bearing Lord Woodbie's name, is a forgery. I give you twelve hours to find the money, and provide for it.

Mo: [Looking at watch] Excuse me, Mr. Quail, I can't stop; I've got to see a man about a dog. I forgot all about it till just now.

Quail: Excuse me, Mr. Davis, but you mustn't leave the room.

Mo: I'm a hinnocent party, Mr. Quail. Upon my word and honor, I knew nothing about it. I hope you didn't think me capable of such a thing as having anything to do with a forged bill. I can scarcely write my own name, let alone anybody else's.

Quail: You forget, Mr. Davis, that I have been your confidential solicitor, and I know quite well what you are capable of. Gentlemen, I have no desire to proceed to extremities; all I want is my money. Your conviction would do me no good, and would not pay me back the cash I have advanced you, but I must protect myself. If the forged bill remains in my office twelve hours longer, I shall present it to Lord Woodbie, and you know what that means.

Goodge: Yes. Seven years!

Mo: [Fainting in Mulligan's arms] Seven years!

Goodge: Very well, Mr. Quail, since those are your terms, we'll try and find the money.

Quail: Then you confess the forgery?

Goodge: As you seem to know all about it, I may as well do so. It was written in a moment of indiscretion. Mulligan suggested it, and I drew it up.

Mo: There, you hear him say I had nothing to do with it.

Goodge: Mo shared in everything with us. He came with Mulligan to your office to get the money.

Mo: Oh, hark at him! Where will he die when you go to?

Quail: Well, just step across to my chambers. And to prevent any possible difference of opinion hereafter, if I give you these twelve hours to find the money, you must give me the undertaking to do so in that time.
Goodge: Come along, then. [Aside to Mulligan] In twelve hours we shall be out of the country. [Going L.]
Mo: Oh, I wish somebody would lend me the key of the Bank of England for ten minutes.

Scene 2: Front Street, Enter Nat and Lord Woodbie followed by Tom Meredith.

Tom: I congratulate you, your lordship. I believe Miss Latimer to be one of the best girls that ever drew the breath of life.
Wood: Thanks, Tom, thanks. I know I have your best wishes.
Nat: There was a time when Master Meredith thought the same of Katey, but all that’s changed now.
Tom: No one more bitterly regrets it than I do, Nat.
Nat: Ah, I suppose that some day you’ll be getting married to some fine lady of quality; then Katey will break her heart and die off like a flower, and I shall retire into private life until the Great Master of Life’s course rings the saddling bell for me to weigh in and go up aloft.
Tom: Give me your hand, good, honest Nat, and believe me when I say that whatever Katey’s feelings may be for me, mine towards her never change. Heaven knows that I love her as much as ever, but after what I saw with my own eyes, heard with my own ears, she could never become my wife; not that I shall ever marry another. I love her too dearly to ever think of such a thing.
Nat: Drat my old breeches if I can make it out. Human beings is funny things; I think I can understand bosses better.
Wood: Here come Julia and Katey, accompanied by my mother. [They are before their time.] [Enter Lady Woodbie L.U E, with Julia on one arm, Katey on the other, followed by Bob, Bob crosses over to Nat after touching his hat to Meredith and Lord Woodbie]
Lady W: Ah, Cecil, we are here rather earlier than I expected. I got my shopping at the stores done much quicker than anticipated. And while I was thus engaged, those two girls got comparing notes and talking over old times. Julia has told Katey something that you told her recently, Cecil, and if my surmises are correct, the clouds may be lifted from Mr. Meredith’s life, and sunshine will once more gladden his path.
Nat: Oh, my lady, what do you mean? A voice seems to whisper to me that it’s something to do with my Katey.
Lady W: Quite right. It has a great deal to do with Miss Katherine.
Wood: Why you don’t think it possible that she was the young girl that was locked up in the stable?
Lady W: But I do, though. She was telling Julia about her sad estrangement with Mr. Meredith, and I have not the slightest doubt that when you have told them the story you told us recently, all will be understood. Speak, Cecil.
Nat: Oh, speak, sir, you’re lifting me off a hoverflowing coal-sack on to a feather bed.
Wood: Well, I told my mother and Julia that some time ago at Doncaster, I came into Flying Scud’s stable to escape a shower of rain, and to hide the tears that an interview with Julia had caused. That was when she refused to become my wife.
Julia: Ah, but you didn’t ask me properly, you know. [Coyfy]
Nat: Go on—I remember meeting you as you came out.
Tom: I seem to have some recollection of it, too.
Wood: I climbed up a ladder into the hayloft, and there overheard a cowardly attempt on the part of Goodge to force his attention on a girl, who evidently wished to repel him. I was unable to get down without attracting their attention, and was obliged to hear everything that took place. Hearing somebody coming, he told her she could get away by a side door, but instead of showing her the way out, he locked her up in Flying Scud’s stable, and was afterwards arrested for an unpaid tailor’s bill before he had time to release her.
The bailiffs took him away with the key in his pocket. Since then he has done everything to try to make her appear guilty, but, on my word of honor, she is innocent.

Tom: Katey! Katey, how I have wronged you. [Embrace]

Nat: Oo--raw! Oo--raw!

Cecil and Julia: Julia! Cecil! [Embrace]

Nat: Oo--raw, again! Oh, I can’t stand it. Bob, embrace me.

Bob: Here! 'Old 'ard! I ain't a lovely female.

Nat: I couldn’t help it, Bob. It’s too much for me.

Bob: Here comes old Quail, the solicitor. How would you like to embrace him?

Tom: And you’ll marry me now, Katey?

Katey: Tom, Tom, I’ve loved you all the time.

Nat: Bless you, my chickabiddies, bless you!

Lady W.: There’ll be two weddings now, instead of one.

Nat: P'raps the clergyman will make a reduction in taking a quantity. [Enter Quail LUJL]

Quail: Excuse me, Lord Woodbie, but my business is urgent and most important.

Wood: Yes? What is it?

Quail: I don’t know whether I ought to speak in the presence of this young lady. [Julia]

Wood: My affianced wife. [Introducing her]

Quail: Yes, your mother has told me all, but Miss Latimer is the niece of one of the parties implicated in a most unpleasant business.

Julia: My uncle? Colonel Mulligan?

Quail: The same, madame.

Julia: I can almost guess what you’re about to say. Please speak without reservation.

Quail: [Hands paper to Lord Woodbie] That document is, I presume, a forgery?

Wood: [After looking at it carefully] I regret to say it is. The signature is very like mine, but I never saw that bill before.

Quail: Written by Captain Goodge, accepted by Mo Davis, and endorsed by Colonel Mulligan.

Julia: If my uncle is guilty, and a forger, let him suffer for what he has done. I have shielded him from the law too long already.

Tom: What is the amount?

Quail: Two thousand pounds.

Tom: Allow me to look at the bill. You shall be paid, Mr. Quail; please regard this debt as being purchased by me.

Quail: But the paper is not worth the stamp that’s on it.

Tom: I’ll buy it. I shan’t miss it out of my winnings on the Derby.

Quail: Well, if you’re willing to buy with your eyes open, I’ll sell. [Hands him bill]

Tom: And now, Grindley Goodge, I’ll show you no mercy. The law will protect you against your racing debts, but with this proof of your forgery, escape is impossible.

Quail: Escape! Ah, that’s it! I gave them twelve hours to find the money, but they have all three escaped, and I have put the police on their track.

Tom: We must go to the nearest magistrate, and obtain a warrant for their apprehension.

Quail: I’ll take you to one; there’s no time to be lost. Your presence will be necessary, my lord, so come. [Exeunt L.]

Nat: I feel twenty years younger.

Bob: And I feel two stone lighter.

Nat: Lord Woodbie is a trump.

Bob: And so is Meredith.

Nat: My Katey isn’t to be scratched after all.

Bob: And Miss Julia has weighed in all right for the Matrimonial Stakes.

Nat: And what do you think of the old woman, Bob?

Bob: Why, she’s another trump. Some of these high and mighty people have got their hearts in the right places after all.

Nat: This Captain Goodge put my darling Katey in a hole, but now we’ve got him in one, and before we let him out, he’ll have to make a clean breast of it.
BOB: Well, if he's going to make a clean breast of it, he'll want a main drainage all to himself.

NAT: Follow me, Bob, let's be in at the finish. [Exit 2?.]

BOB: Well, this is a wind-up to a windy day. That Katey is a rare plucked 'un; a girl that is a werry 'ard 'un to meet. Like a sound hoss; you don't see 'em every day. Marry her, I should think he ought to. He ought to marry her once a month to his dying day. [Exit L.]

[SCENE 3: The garret. Table RH., covered with a cloth; door LH. Large safe. Enter Mo Davis.]

MO: Nobody saw me come in; vot an escape I've had. I'll lock the door hin'ards, and take the key out, so's there's no time to lose. Vere is my duplicate keys? Here they are. There's Goodge's, and here's Mulligan's—now for mine. Ah! [He opens safe] Here's the money. [Takes it out] All right; one hundred and twenty pounds. I'll start for Southampton by the next train, and get aboard the first ship leavin' for anyvvhere. The police vill be alive tonight. Bless me, what a sqveek I've had. [Going. The door is tried] Vot's that? [Recoils] Bless me 'art, there's somebody—00—whish—dey is talking. 'Tis Goodge—00—00—here's a go! [The door is violently shaken] Oo—jumpin' Moses, here's another hole! My life is a honeycomb. Vere can I hide till he is gone? [He creeps under the table. The door is burst open. Enter Goodge]

GOODGE: I had no time for ceremony; in a few hours, the hunt will begin. I must secure the money at once. Where is my key? I must force the other locks. What! the safe open] Damnation! Someone has been here. Yes, the money is gone—not a penny left. Betrayed! Robbed by one of those infernal associates of mine. Who could it be? Not Davis—he is safe in Quail's hands. It was Mulligan! There is another room yonder—he may be in there. [Goes R.D. Exits]

MO: He's gone—now's my time. [Enter Mulligan with pistol case D.F.] Oh! [Disappears under table again]

MULL: If ever I come across that villain, Goodge, I'll pay him off. Poor Julia! And to think that I was accessory to such a thing. I can never show my face in Piccadilly again. A hansom cab would refuse me a fare. I'll borrow the few pounds here, and start for America. [Turns and sees the safe] The divil! What's this? The safe open? The money gone! I've been robbed by one of them blackguards, friends of mine. [Re-enter Goodge R.D.] It could not have been Davis. It was Goodge!

GOODGE: [Seeing Mulligan] Ha!

MULL: [Seeing Goodge] Ha!

GOODGE: You Irish vagabond!

MULL: You cockney thief! [Crosses to L.] I left a hundred and twenty pounds in the safe. You have taken it out.

GOODGE: You vile perverter of the truth, it was you that took it. You mean thief! Give me half that money!

MULL: Disgorge your plunder, and share it like a gentleman. [They seize each other]

GOODGE: Stand back! [Releases himself and runs to pistol case] Stay! You pretend you have not on your person the contents of the safe. I know that you have.

MULL: And I am certain that they are safe in your pocket.

GOODGE: Take that revolver, then, and I will take this; let the survivor search the one who falls.